CULTURAL PROBES 

As the local site coordinator finished his introduction to the meeting, our worries were increasing. The group had taken on a glazed look, showing polite interest, but no real enthusiasm. How would they react when we presented them with our packages? Would disinterest deepen to boredom, or even hostility?
Of course an explanation had been necessary for this special meeting with us, three foreign designers. The coordinator explained that we were there as part of a European Union–funded research project looking at novel interaction techniques to increase the presence of the elderly in their local communities. We represented two design centers that would be working over the next two years with three community sites: in the Majorstua, a district of Oslo; the Bijlmer, a large planned community near Amsterdam; and Peccioli, a small village outside Pisa. We were at the last site, to get to know the group a little. 
An important preamble, then, well delivered by the coordinator, but the explanation was of necessity fairly complicated. On our arrival, the 10 elderly members had been friendly and enthusiastic, if a little puzzled. 22 Now they were looking tired. 
Finally the time came. I stood up and said, “We’ve brought you a kind of gift,” as we all passed the clear blue plastic envelopes to the group. (See Fig. 1) “They’re a way for us to get to know you better, and for you to get to know us.” Already people were starting to unwind the strings fastening the envelopes. “Take a look,” I said, “and we’ll explain what’s in them.” 
An assortment of maps, postcards, cameras, and booklets began accumulating in front of them. Curious, they started examining the materials. Soon they were smiling and discussing them with their neighbors. 
As the feeling of the group livened perceptibly, we started explaining the contents. Worry transformed to excitement. Perhaps the probes would work after all.

Cultural Probes

The cultural probes—these packages of maps, postcards, and other materials—were designed to provoke inspirational responses from elderly people in diverse communities. Like astronomic or surgical probes, we left them behind when we had gone and waited for them to return fragmentary data over time. 
The probes were part of a strategy of pursuing experimental design in a responsive way. They address a common dilemma in developing projects for unfamiliar groups. Understanding the local cultures was necessary so that our designs wouldn’t seem irrelevant or arrogant, but we didn’t want the groups to constrain our designs unduly by focusing on needs or desires they already understood. We wanted to lead a discussion with the groups toward unexpected ideas, but we didn’t want to dominate it.

Postcards

Within the probe packages, people found 8 to 10 postcards scattered among other materials. The cards had images on the front, and questions on the back, such as: 
Please tell us a piece of advice or insight that has been important to you. 
What do you dislike about Peccioli.
What place does art have in your life? 
Tell us about your favorite device.
The questions concerned the elders’ attitudes towards their lives, cultural environments, and technology. But we used oblique wording and evocative images to open a space of possibilities, allowing the elders as much room to respond as possible. 
Postcards are an attractive medium for asking these sorts of questions because of their connotations as an informal, friendly mode of communication. (See Fig. 2) Unlike formal questionnaires, the postcards encouraged questions to be approached casually, which was underlined by pre-addressing and stamping them for separate return.

Maps

The probes contained about seven maps, each with an accompanying inquiry exploring the elders’ attitudes toward their environment. (See Fig. 3) 
Requests ranged from straightforward to poetic. For instance, a map of the world included the question “Where have you been in the world?”, and small dot stickers were provided to mark answers. Participants were also asked to mark zones on local maps, showing us where, for instance, 
They would go to meet people 
They would go to be alone 
They liked to daydream 
They would like to go but can’t 
A more surreal task was given to each group as well; in the case of Peccioli, for example, a map was labeled “if Peccioli were New York...” and was accompanied by stickers showing scenes ranging from the Statue of Liberty to people injecting drugs. 
The maps were printed on a variety of textured papers to emphasize their individuality and cut into several different envelope forms. When the elderly were finished with them, they folded them together and put them in the mail.

Camera 

Each probe included a disposable camera, repackaged to separate it from its commercial origins and to integrate it with the other probe materials. On the back we listed requests for pictures, such as
Your home 
What you will wear today 
The first person you see today 
Something desirable 
Something boring 
About half the pictures were unassigned, and the elders were asked to photograph whatever they wanted to show us before mailing the camera back to us. (See Fig. 4)

Photo Album and Media Diary

The last two items in the probes were in the form of small booklets. The first was a photo album, which requesting the elders to “use 6 to 10 pictures to tell us your story.” When questioned, we encouraged participants to use photos of the past, their families, their current lives, or anything they found meaningful. (See Fig. 5) 
Finally, each probe contained a media diary, in which elderly participants were asked to record their television and radio use, including what they watched, with whom, and when. They were also asked to note incoming and outgoing calls, including their relationship with the caller and the subject of the calls. The entries were made daily, for a total of a week.

Context 

A number of converging interests and constraints were involved in designing the probes. The Presence Project has been funded for two years under the European Union’s 13 initiative. Eight partners from four countries are exploring technologies to increase the presence of the elderly in their local communities. This is a relatively unconstrained project, defined only in terms of its overall goal and its flow over time. The first year has been spent on opening a space of possible designs; the second will focus on developing prototypes to be tested in the sites. 
The sites themselves constrain the sorts of design explorations that might be meaningful. In Oslo, we are working with a group of elderly who have been learning to use the Internet at a local library. In the Netherlands, the elders live in the Bijlmer, an extensive planned community with a poor reputation. Finally, the Italian site is in Peccioli, a small Tuscan village where an elder center is being planned. The diversity of the sites was clear from the outset. Our task was to better understand their particularities. 
The openness of the design brief, and the availability of more quantitative demographic data from the local sites, meant that we could freely explore many different aspects of the elders’ attitudes. Of course, we might have used more traditional methods to do this, including perhaps ethnographic studies, interviews, or questionnaires. That we didn’t stems, in part, from how we think about doing research through design.

Design as Research 

We approach research into new technologies from the traditions of artist–designers rather than the more typical science- and engineering-based approaches. 
Unlike much research, we don’t emphasize precise analyses or carefully controlled methodologies; instead, we concentrate on aesthetic control, the cultural implications of our designs, and ways to open new spaces for design. Scientific theories may be one source of inspiration for us, but so are more informal analyses, chance observations, the popular press, and other such “unscientific” sources.
Unlike most design, we don’t focus on commercial products, but on new understandings of technology. This allows us—even requires us—to be speculative in our designs, as trying to extend the boundaries of current technologies demands that we explore functions, experiences, and cultural placements quite outside the norm. 
Instead of designing solutions for user needs, then, we work to provide opportunities to discover new pleasures, new forms of sociability, and new cultural forms. We often act as provocateurs through our designs, trying to shift current perceptions of technology functionally, aesthetically, culturally, and even politically.

Inspiration, not Information*

The artist–designer approach is openly subjective, only partly guided by any “objective” problem statement. Thus we were after “inspirational data” with the probes, to stimulate our imaginations rather than define a set of problems. 
We weren’t trying to reach an objective view of the elders’ needs through the probes, but instead a more impressionistic account of their beliefs and desires, their aesthetic preferences and cultural concerns. Using official looking questionnaires or formal meetings seemed likely to cast us in the role of doctors, diagnosing user problems and prescribing technological cures. Conversely, we didn’t want to be servants either, letting the elders set the directions for our designs. Trying to establish a role as provocateurs, we shaped the probes as interventions that would affect the elders while eliciting informative responses from them.

Combating Distance

To establish a conversation with the elder groups, we had to overcome several kinds of distance that might separate us, some endemic to most research, some particular to this project. Foremost was the kind of distance of officialdom that comes with being flown in as well-funded experts. Trying to reduce this sort of distance underlay a great deal of the tone and aesthetics of the probe materials.
Geographic and cultural distances were more specific problems for this project. We designed the materials to be posted separately, both to acknowledge our distance and to emphasize our ongoing lives in other countries (thus we used our names in the addresses, as opposed to an institutional title like “The Presence Project”). We also tried to design the materials to be as visual as possible, to some extent bypassing language barriers.

Respecting Our Elders

A particularly important gap for us to bridge was the generational gap implied by designing for another age group. To encourage a provocative dialogue about design, we tried to reject stereotypes of older people as “needy” or “nice.” This freed us, in turn, to challenge the elder groups, both through the probes and our eventual designs. 
Moving beyond a view of older people as needy or nice has allowed us to view them in new ways, opening new opportunities for design. For instance, elders represent a lifetime of experiences and knowledge, often deeply embedded in their local communities. This could be an invaluable resource to the younger members of their community. 
Conversely, elders also represent a life free from the need to work, and thus the possibility of exploring life as homo ludens, humanity defined by its playful qualities. Our designs could offer them opportunities to appreciate their environments—social, urban, and natural—in new and intriguing ways.

Functional Aesthetics

Throughout the project, we have viewed aesthetic and conceptual pleasure as a right rather than a luxury. We didn’t work on the aesthetics of the probes simply to make them appealing or motivating but because we believe aesthetics to be an integral part of functionality, with pleasure a criterion for design equal to efficiency or usability. 
We worked to make the probe materials delightful, but not childish or condescending. In fact, the aesthetics were somewhat abstract or alien in order to encourage from respondents a slightly detached attitude to our requests. But although the materials were aesthetically crafted, they were not too professionally finished. This gave them a personal and informal feeling, allowing them to escape the genres of official forms or of commercial marketing. In the end, they revealed the energy we put into them and expressed our tastes and interests to the groups. 
The aesthetics of the packages were thus another attempt to reduce the distance between us and the groups. Through the materials and images and the requests we made, we tried to reveal ourselves to the groups as we asked them to reveal themselves to us. Not only did this make the probes themselves enjoyable and communicative, but it meant that they started to hint at what the elders might expect from our eventual designs.

Applying Conceptual 

Art The conceptual concerns and specific techniques of various arts movements also influenced our design. For instance, our maps are related to the psychogeographical maps of the Situationists [1] (see the sidebar), which capture the emotional ambience of different locations. Unfamiliar with the local sites ourselves, we asked the local groups to map them for us. Not only did this give us material to inform our designs, but, we hope, provoked the elders to consider their environment in a new way. 
We used other techniques from groups such as Dada, the Surrealists, and more contemporary artists in the probes as well. They incorporated elements of collage, in which juxtaposed images open new and provocative spaces, and of borrowing and subverting the visual and textual languages of advertisements, postcards, and other elements of commercial culture. Finally, we tried to use, judiciously, tactics of ambiguity, absurdity, and mystery throughout, as a way of provoking new perspectives on everyday life.

Launching the Probes 

We gave the probes to members of the elder groups in a series of meetings at the local sites, like the one described in the beginning of this paper. We did not describe every item, but instead introduced the types of things they would find. We wanted them to be surprised as they returned to the packages over the following weeks. 
Originally we had planned to send the packages to the groups, but we were afraid they might reject the unusual approach we were taking. We decided to present them ourselves to explain our intentions, answer questions, and encourage the elders to take an informal, experimental approach to the materials. 
This turned out to be an extremely fortunate decision, because one of the unexpected strengths of the probes was in sparking a dialogue between us and the elderly. What we feared would be polite group discussions turned out to be spontaneous and personal, and we learned a great deal about the groups in discussing the materials. Even after we left, some of the elders sent us personal greetings beyond the materials themselves—postcards, letters, even personalized Christmas cards.

The Returns

For about a month after we left each site, we started receiving the completed materials, at a rate that seemed to compare favorably with that for other methods. Every day or so, we would find another few postcards, maps, or cameras in our post, which allowed us to scan and sort them in a piecemeal and leisurely fashion. (See Fig. 6) 
Some of the items that the elders returned were left blank or they included notes about why the given request was difficult. We had encouraged this in the meetings, as a way of keeping the process open to the elders’ opinions. And in fact, we redesigned the materials for each group as we received returns from the last. 
Sorting through the masses of maps, cards, and photographs that we received, strong and differentiated views of the three sites began to emerge. Some items acted as beacons for us— a photograph of friends at an Italian café, a map of the Bijlmer with extensive notes about the “junkies and thieves” in the area, a joke about death from Oslo. They seemed to capture particular facets of the cultures, clearly symbolizing important issues. (See Fig. 7) 
The return rates from the groups added to our impressions of their differences. The Oslo group returned almost all the materials, and thus seemed enthusiastic and diligent. The Bijlmer group returned a bit more than half the materials: they seemed less convinced by the project but willing to take part in tasks they found meaningful or provoking. Finally, the Peccioli group returned less than half the materials, despite being enthusiastic when they received them. We take this as a sign that they are well meaning but happily distracted by their daily lives—an important factor for our designs.

From Probes to Designs

The probes were not designed to be analyzed, nor did we summarize what they revealed about the sites as an explicit stage in the process. Rather, the design proposals we produced reflected what we learned from the materials. For the Royal College of Art, the probe materials allowed the different characters of the three sites to emerge, which we are reflecting in quite different design scenarios: 
In the Bijlmer, our ideas respond to the paradox of a strong community in a dangerous area: We have proposed building a network of computer displays with which the elderly could help inhabitants communicate their values and attitudes about the culture. 
The group in Oslo is affluent, well educated, and enthusiastic: We are proposing that they lead a communitywide conversation about social issues, publishing questions from the library that are sent for public response to electronic systems in cafés, trams, or public spaces. 
Finally, the elders in Peccioli enjoy a relaxed social life in a beautiful setting. We plan to amplify their pleasure by creating social and pastoral radioscapes, allowing them to create flexible communications networks and to listen to the sounds of the surrounding countryside. (See Fig. 8) 
For the Domus Academy, the returns suggested a range of nonstereotypical profiles of elders that were less focused on the particular sites. For instance, many elders are experts on the current status and history of their communities and might serve as local information resources, perhaps by guiding tourists. They are eager to keep in touch with friends and families, and thus new technologies might support relationships with distant relatives or with children and grandchildren closer to home, or might provide forms of “soft surveillance” or informal help chains to combat social isolation. Finally, the elderly might provide a living memory of a particular community, enriching the physical environment with virtual traces of its history. 
These proposals were our reply to the elders’ responses to the probes, integrating what we learned about them with suggestions for new possibilities. The best evidence that the returns from the probes spurred valuable insights into the local cultures was that the elders clearly recognized themselves in the proposals. Although some of our suggestions were intended to be strange or provocative, the elders became readily involved with them, making suggestions for reshaping the ideas, but without breakdowns in the conversation that would have indicated our perceptions were crude or mistaken. This notion of a continuing conversation with the elders has been pivotal to our understanding of the probes as a method.

User-Centered Inspiration

Although the probes were central to our understanding of the sites, they didn’t directly lead to our designs. They were invaluable in making us aware of the detailed texture of the sites, allowing us to shape proposals to fit them. But we were also influenced by our preexisting conceptual interests, our visits to the sites, anecdotes and data about the areas from the local coordinators, and readings from the popular and specialist press. Just as many influences went into designing the probes, so have they been one of many influences on our design process. 
The cultural probes were successful for us in trying to familiarize ourselves with the sites in a way that would be appropriate for our approach as artist–designers. They provided us with a rich and varied set of materials that both inspired our designs and let us ground them in the detailed textures of the local cultures. 
What we learned about the elders is only half the story, however. The other half is what the elders learned from the probes. They provoked the groups to think about the roles they play and the pleasures they experience, hinting to them that our designs might suggest new roles and new experiences. In the end, the probes helped establish a conversation with the groups, one that has continued throughout the project. 
We believe the cultural probes could be adapted to a wide variety of similar design projects. Just as machine-addressed letters seem more pushy than friendly, however, so might a generic approach to the probes produce materials that seem insincere, like official forms with a veneer of marketing. The real strength of the method was that we had designed and produced the materials specifically for this project, for those people, and for their environments. The probes were our personal communication to the elders, and prompted the elders to communicate personally in return.

Acknowledgments

The Presence Project is supported by a grant from the European Union under the I3 initiative. We are extremely grateful to the members of the three groups and to Sidsel Bjorneby, Simon Clatworthy, Danielle van Diemen, and Cecelia Laschi, the local site coordinators. We thank Ben Hooker and Fiona Raby for help with the design and production of the probe materials and Anne Schlottmann for helpful comments on this paper. Finally, we thank our partners from the Domus Academy, Netherlands Design Institute, Telenor, Human Factors Solutions, Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna, and IDEA.

DESIGNING FOR HOMO LUDENS

The advent of graphical interfaces, more than fifteen years ago, revolutionised the way we think about computers. The desktop metaphor had such a complete inner logic that it seemed to dismiss offhand the tedious call-and-response interfaces that had prevailed. The computer as concept expanded from a tool to a virtual environment, from a clumsy machine to a place for exploration and experimentation. Research on interaction also expanded, as people sought new perspectives from which to understand this newly-discovered territory – from cognition, to perceptual, to ethnographic and anthropological. As our appreciation of computing’s potential grew, so did our appreciation of the aspects of humanity it mirrors. 

Now we are on the brink of another revolution, as computers invade our everyday lives. The point is not that computers are becoming ubiquitous or ambient or disappearing altogether. Nor am I saying that interaction will be tangible, or that the virtual will merge with the physical. These things may happen, but they’re symptoms — attempts to shortcut technologically the challenges we face. The real revolution is that computing is leaving the confines of task-oriented, rational, ‘left-brain’ work, and is set to join us in our homes, on the street, at parties, on lonely mountaintops – everywhere, in short, where ‘work’ is the stuff we want to get done so we can do what we really want to do. 

The effects of this new revolution will, I believe, be as radical as the move to graphical interfaces, causing us to rethink computers, research, and even ourselves. However, we have been slow to appreciate the implications of technology’s incursion into our everyday lives. As computing has emerged from the office and laboratory, it seems to have brought along values of the workplace: concerns for clarity, efficiency and productivity; a preoccupation with finding solutions to problems. If, as ethnographers suggest, it takes a lot of work to achieve an ordinary life, then new technologies will help us take care of it. In this vision, internet-enabled refrigerators will automatically update our shopping lists. We will use our microwave ovens to do our banking as well as to heat ready-made meals. Mobile devices will allow us to coordinate our schedules, download information, update records on the move. We will be surrounded by technology devoted to taking care of our everyday chores, giving us the leisure to pursue whatever activities we really value. 
But what if technologies helped us pursue those activities now, directly, rather than merely helping us get the chores done? What if computing helped us pursue our lives, not just our work?

The idea of Homo Ludens – humans defined as playful creatures (Huizinga, J., 1950) – is an antidote to assumptions that technology should provide clear, efficient solutions to practical problems. From this perspective, we are characterised not just by our thinking or achievements, but by our playfulness: our curiosity, our love of diversion, our explorations, inventions and wonder. An aimless walk in the city centre, a moment of awe, a short-lived obsession, a joke – all are defining and valuable facets of our humanity, as worthy of respect as planning, logic or study. Play is not just mindless entertainment, but an essential way of engaging with and learning about our world and ourselves — for adults as well as children. As we toy with things and ideas, as we chat and daydream, we find new perspectives and new ways to create, new ambitions, relationships, and ideals. Play goes well beyond entertainment: it’s a serious business. 

What sorts of computational device might appeal to Homo Ludens? The Pillow, by Tony Dunne (Dunne, 1999; Gaver & Dunne, 1996; see Figure 1) might be an example. This is a clear inflatable pillow, enclosing a translucent plastic block with holes cut in it, exposing patterns of colour as they play over an LCD screen. As the light suffuses the object, it creates a much softer, more imprecise display than we usually associate with computers. But the Pillow isn’t just an aesthetic object; it is a strange form of radio in which lighting reflects bits of electromagnetic information from radio stations, passing taxis or nearby baby alarms. And more than a radio, it is a poser of sociocultural questions, pointing out the degree to which our homes and even our bodies are permeated by wireless communications. It casts its viewers as meditative voyeurs, providing them with a gentle electronic experience while subtly eliciting unease about the communications that feed it. It is an object which invites a relationship, not as a pet, but perhaps as a sort of computational alien sharing one’s home (Dunne, 1999). 

Some of the designs developed in the I3 Presence Project, too, might speak to Homo Ludens (see Gaver & Hooker, 2001). At the RCA, Tony Dunne, Ben Hooker, Shona Kitchen, Brendan Walker and I explored ways that technology might increase the presence of older people in three communities: a hilltop village in Tuscany, an affluent district of Oslo, and a huge housing estate in the Netherlands. Our designs took a wide and playful view of ‘presence’. In Italy, we proposed a ‘radioscape’ that would transmit sounds from the countryside to the village, encouraging the older people to enjoy their pastoral landscape in new ways (Figure 2). In Oslo, we suggested that the older people might use a ‘digital boudouir’ to craft questions for their fellow citizens, to be displayed on trams or in cafés, or relayed to public phones (Figure 3). In the Netherlands, we proposed and built the Projected Realities system, which disseminated people’s attitudes from their private flats, through local neighbourhoods, to the roads and railways surrounding this notorious area. With visible elements including ‘sloganbenches’ (Figure 4a) and an ‘imagebank’ (Figure 4b), the Projected Realities system allowed passers-by to encounter the words and images of their older neighbours in a way that was not didactic or demanding, but quietly suggestive. 

Ludic appeal might also be found in the proposals that Heather Martin and I developed for the Alternatives project (Gaver & Martin, 1999). Funded by Hewlett Packard, the Alternatives project was part of the Appliance Design Studio, a collaborative investigation of information appliances. In investigating the field, Heather and I found ourselves uninspired by current examples, and developed a series of sketch proposals to expand the group’s thinking. For instance, the Dawn Chorus (Figure 5a) was a birdfeeder that would use operant conditioning principles to teach local songbirds new tunes. The (De)tour Guide would be an audio-only device using GPS and an electronic compass to lead people through the city – and to support them in getting lost for a predetermined interval. The Intimate View camera (Figure 5b), later developed as a prototype, linked separated lovers by allowing them to capture and transmit small, highly magnified pictures to encourage moments of intensely shared focus. The Dream Communicator allowed distant lovers to use sounds or speech to influence one another’s dreams. Finally, the Telegotchi was an electronic pet with no buttons that relied on psionic communication for happiness (Figure 5c), and the Prayer Device (Figure 5d) would be found on streets, like a new sort of telephone booth, waiting to transmit one’s voice to the sky. The appeal of many of these proposals, in particular, was that they didn’t demand belief so much as a suspension of disbelief. They encouraged an attitude of speculation that in itself might be enjoyable.

The examples described here may be pleasurable to experience, but it should be clear that they go beyond mere entertainment. Each raises issues and asks questions, ranging from the effects of pervasive electromagnetic communication, to possibilities for inter-generational communication, to the ethics of taming nature, the value of getting lost, or the status of psychic or spiritual experiences. They raise these issues, but don’t provide answers. Instead, they offer ways for people to experience life from new perspectives, thereby testing hypotheses about who we might be or what we might care about. They hint at possibilities for technologies that we could use in our everyday life, not to accomplish well-defined tasks, but to expand in undefined directions. Open-ended and personal, they encourage us to play – seriously – with experiences, ideas and other people.

What does designing for Homo Ludens imply for our methodologies? How can we invent and develop systems that legitimise wonder, even encourage it? How do we encourage people to meander, rather than to accomplish tasks with speed? 

First, scientific approaches to design need to be complemented by more subjective, idiosyncratic ones. It is difficult to conceive of a task analysis for goofing around, or to think of exploration as a problem to be solved, or to determine usability requirements for systems meant to spark new perceptions. Instead, designers need to use their personal experiences as sounding boards for the systems they create. Balancing this, they need to engage in, and often lead, a conversation with the people for whom they are developing, lest their designs become purely self-indulgent. Traditional requirements capture or ethnographic methods may be useful in this, but more ambiguous, open-ended forms of engagement can also produce inspiring results. For instance, the Cultural Probes developed for Presence (Gaver et al., 1999; see Figure 6) used provocative questions and tasks to elicit informative materials from volunteers. The returns were never definitive, but they were evocative, allowing us to create semi-factual narratives about the communities for whom we were designing, and to develop design ideas that furthered these stories. 

Second, designing for Homo Ludens means allowing room for people to appropriate technologies. Playing involves pursuing one’s inner narratives in safe situations, through perceptual projection or, ideally, action. If computational devices channel people’s activities and perceptions too closely, then people have to live out somebody else’s story, not their own (c.f. Wejchert, 2001). This might be an interesting possibility – as Dunne (1999) suggests, people might approach computational devices the way they do cinema, borrowing the identities and values they suggest for a short period of time – but in general we should give people the ability to own technology, to bring it into their own complex life stories. I know two primary tactics for doing this. The first is to create ‘suggestive media’ – suggestive in that they are designed to encourage or impel ludic activity, and media in that they are tools through which people experience, create, or communicate freely. The second is to employ ambiguity at all phases of design. Contrary to traditional thinking about interaction, ambiguity is an invaluable tool because it allows people to find their own meaning in uncertain situations. Used in design processes, concepts and products, ambiguity gives space for people to intermesh their own stories with those hinted at by technologies. 

Third, and most important, pleasure comes before performance, and engagement before clarity. Designing for Homo Ludens requires a new focus that seeks intrigue and delight at all levels of design, from the aesthetics of form and interaction, to functionality, to conceptual implications at psychological, social and cultural levels. Not only should technologies reinforce pleasures that people know, but they should suggest new ones. The designer’s role in this is not like that of a doctor, prescribing cures for people’s ills; nor is the designer a kind of servant, developing technologies that people know they want. Instead, designers should be provocateurs, seeking out new possibilities for play and crafting technologies that entice people to explore them. In the end, designers themselves need to be Homo Ludens. They need to recognise that they are playful creatures, and that their work depends on their play.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

I am grateful to Jake Beaver, Anne Schlottmann, and Jakub Wejchert for their comments and suggestions. 

AMBIGUITY AS A RESOURCE FOR DESIGN 

ABSTRACT

Ambiguity is usually considered anathema in Human Computer Interaction. We argue, in contrast, that it is a resource for design that can be used to encourage close personal engagement with systems. We illustrate this with examples from contemporary arts and design practice, and distinguish three broad classes of ambiguity according to where uncertainty is located in the interpretative relationship linking person and artefact. Ambiguity of information finds its source in the artefact itself, ambiguity of context in the sociocultural discourses that are used to interpret it, and ambiguity of relationship in the interpretative and evaluative stance of the individual. For each of these categories, we describe tactics for emphasising ambiguity that may help designers and other practitioners understand and craft its use.

Keywords
Interaction design, Emotion and Affective UI, Design, Theory, Design Tips and Tricks, Heuristics, Interpretation

INTRODUCTION

Ambiguity is seldom embraced within traditional Human Computer Interaction. If “usefulness and usability are the twin goals of HCI research and development” [14], then ambiguity would seem their nemesis. It is difficult to see how an interface can be usable if the information it conveys is unclear, or useful if its very purpose is uncertain. 

Instead of regarding ambiguity as a problem, however, in this paper we suggest that it can be seen as an opportunity. Ambiguity can be frustrating, to be sure. But it can also be intriguing, mysterious, and delightful. By impelling people to interpret situations for themselves, it encourages them to start grappling conceptually with systems and their contexts, and thus to establish deeper and more personal relations with the meanings offered by those systems. 

The ability for ambiguity to evoke personal relationships with technologies is particularly relevant as digital technologies are designed to support activities outside of work. Traditional concerns for clarity and precision are superseded in such systems by the need to provide rich resources for experience that can be appropriated by users. Ambiguity should not, of course, be allowed to interfere with the accomplishment of well-defined tasks, particularly in safety-critical environments. But in the many emerging applications for everyday life, we argue that ambiguity is a resource that designers should neither ignore nor repress. 

After all, the everyday world itself is inherently ambiguous: most things in it have multiple possible meanings. Allowing this ambiguity to be reflected in design has several advantages. Most importantly, it allows designers to engage users with issues without constraining how they respond. In addition, it allows the designer’s point of view to be expressed while enabling users of different sociocultural backgrounds to find their own interpretations. Finally, ambiguity can make a virtue out of technical limitations by providing the grounds for people’s interpretations to supplement them. 

The rich aesthetic and conceptual potentials of ambiguity have long been exploited in the arts, and we review several examples of contemporary art in considering how ambiguity works. But we are particularly concerned with examining how ambiguity can be used to good effect in design. To orient our discussion, we start by describing four examples of ambiguity in interaction design, which illustrate the appeal of ambiguity and some of its attributes. We then discuss an account of ambiguity that centres on its locus in the relationship between user and system, and show how this can help us understand ambiguity in a variety of situations. Finally, we return to the original four examples, as well as other designs, to illustrate a number of tactics for producing ambiguity. Our purpose throughout is to reveal some of the techniques that interactions designers use in creating compelling designs, and to enable other designers and practitioners to think more precisely – whether critically or constructively – about ambiguity.

Four Systems that Use Ambiguity

Although ambiguity is usually avoided in Human Computer Interaction, there are a growing number of interactive designs that use it to good effect. In this section we describe four in order to provide concrete examples of how ambiguity can appear in technological systems, before moving to a more analytical account of how it operates. 

Projected Realities 
Projected Realities [8, 9] is a system intended to help increase the presence of older people in a large Dutch housing estate called the Bijlmer. Designed to reflect both concerns that older people felt about the area (which has a bad reputation in the Netherlands) and their pride for this complex physical and cultural environment, the system provided a means for them to spread their opinions within and to the outskirts of the district. The most visible elements of the completed system were three Sloganbenches set in local walkways, and an Imagebank designed to sit near a traffic signal adjacent to the area (Figure 1). Sloganbenches served as public furniture, but also contained electronically controlled fabric scrolls inset into their backs which displayed handwritten slogans written by older people from the area. The Imagebank comprised five monitors set into a wood-veneer casing. It showed slices of images collected by the older people to represent their lives. The pieces were connected wirelessly, so that the attitudes expressed by the slogans on local Sloganbenches could be summarised by the images showing on a single roadside Imagebank. Projected Realities used ambiguity in a number of ways. The slogans and images were presented with little context (even the fact that they originated from older people was spread by word of mouth) so that viewers had to interpret the attitudes they reflected. The mapping between slogans and images was not easily perceived, and occasionally contradictory images were juxtaposed on the Imagebank. Most notably, the objects themselves were unusual – the Imagebank looked like an extended TV, and the benches created a tension between sitting and viewing (since sitting on the bench was likely to hide the slogan). They balanced the familiar with the strange, and as local people encountered the pieces during a week-long trial in the area, they appeared to be attracted by this ambiguity to engage with the system.

Desert Rain 
Desert Rain is a mixed reality performance that has toured internationally since 1999 [12]. Six players (the audience) are sent on a mission into a virtual world to find six targets (the performers). They explore motels, deserts and underground bunkers, communicating with each other through a live audio link. Once in the virtual world, they have twenty minutes to find their allocated targets, complete the mission, and get to the final room, where the identities of the targets – six people who have quite different perspectives on the Gulf war – are revealed. The virtual world is projected onto six rain curtains, screens made of water through which performers and players physically pass (Figure 2). In turn, the rain curtains are embedded within a larger physical set, some of which reproduces elements of the virtual world. 
The central artistic concern of Desert Rain is virtual warfare and the blurring of the boundaries between real and virtual events, especially with regard to the portrayal of warfare on television news, in Hollywood's films and in computer games. Both the content and the form of Desert Rain are designed to provoke participants to re-evaluate the boundaries between reality and fiction, and between the real and the virtual. This is achieved by making these boundaries deliberately ambiguous. Desert Rain mixes elements of theatre, installation and computer game to create an ambiguous structure. At the same time, its content mixes 3D game-like graphics with video clips describing people's real experiences of the Gulf War. It also seeks to disorientate participants to some extent by providing them with deliberately distorted and ambiguous information, most notably through the use of the rain curtain which provides a continually shifting and blurred view of the virtual world.

The Pillow 
The Pillow, a concept prototype by Tony Dunne [8], employs ambiguity at several levels. An LCD screen embedded in a plastic brick is enclosed by a transparent plastic pillow, so that the simple geometric shapes it displays are blurred as they permeate the form (Figure 3). These shapes join with processed sounds to indicate passing electromagnetic information from mobile phones, taxis, commercial radio and television, making the Pillow into an unusual sort of radio – one that, moreover, casts the viewer into a voyeuristic relationship with the otherwise invisible information that surrounds us. The Pillow displays electronic information in an impressionistic, ambiguous way. One can perceive the intensity of electromagnetic flow and capture snatches of intelligible sound, but the information is distorted and fragmented to produce an intriguing rather than informative experience. In addition, the Pillow exists at the cusp of several discourses: it is a radio, but also an aesthetic meditation – and perhaps also an artistic one. Finally, the Pillow produces yet another layer of ambiguity: by placing the user in a voyeuristic role it creates an ambivalent relationship with the purpose of the piece itself. The ability to eavesdrop on the electromagnetic spectrum is enticing yet uncomfortable, prompting questions about the ethics of technologies.

Home Health 
Monitor The Home Health Monitor is a design for a system that gives feedback about the home’s emotional, social and spiritual health on a daily basis [2]. Light, temperature, and door sensors, for example, would be used to monitor peoples’ activities in various parts of the home. Other sensors measure the stroke rate of a hairbrush, condensation on kitchen windows, or the state of the toilet seat to provide more idiosyncratic clues. Sensor readings and trends are mapped in state space to a collection of sentences drawn from a large number of published horoscopes to automatically generate a bespoke horoscope for the particular household on a given day (Figure 4). By using ubiquitous sensing as an indication of the wellbeing of the home, the system (sometimes known as ‘the Superstitious Home’) offers an alternative to traditionally task-oriented forms of ubiquitous computing. It achieves its effect by allowing horoscopes to provide an ambiguous reflection of the state of sensors, which themselves have an ambiguous relationship to the realities of home life. This ambiguity ranges from the limited ability of sensors to monitor home activities to the relationship between measurable variables and emotional ones, and from the vague language used by most horoscopes to the juxtaposition of electronic technology with culturally suspect ‘fortune-telling.’ The end result is to provide people with a systematic but inconclusive foundation from which to reflect on the emotional state of their home.

Clarifying Ambiguity*

Our examples have included products, systems and events, and their intended settings include homes, performance spaces and public areas. Such variety indicates how many systems may benefit from ambiguity. Yet it is not simply their ambiguities that distinguish our examples, but the net effect of these ambiguities. They are similar insofar as their use of ambiguity makes them evocative rather than didactic, and mysterious rather than explicit. As such, they embody a style of interaction that, while relatively new to HCI, is potentially as encompassing as the more traditional style of overt practicality. This style hinges, in part, on the use of ambiguity, and the examples illustrate several of its features that are key to its understanding. 

Most importantly, they highlight the fact that ambiguity is a property of the interpretative relationship between people and artefacts. This distinguishes ambiguity from related concepts such as fuzziness or inconsistency: these are attributes of things, whereas ambiguity is an attribute of our interpretation of them. Things themselves are not inherently ambiguous. They may give rise to multiple interpretations depending on their precision, consistency, and accuracy on the one hand, and the identity, motivations, and expectations of an interpreter on the other. 

This interpretative relationship is the source of ambiguity’s appeal: by thwarting easy interpretation, ambiguous situations require people to participate in making meaning. This can involve the integration of previously disconnected discourses, the projection of meaning onto an unspecified situation, or the resolution of an ethical dilemma. In each case, the artefact or situation sets the scene for meaningmaking, but doesn’t prescribe the result. Instead, the work of making an ambiguous situation comprehensible belongs to the person, and this can be both inherently pleasurable and lead to a deep conceptual appropriation of the artefact.

TYPES OF AMBIGUITY

Despite the fact that ambiguity is a property of the an interpretative relationship, the likelihood of an ambiguous interpretation can be affected either by attributes of artefacts or by people’s attitudes alone. For example, interfaces that are imprecise or contradictory are more likely to lead to multiple interpretations than ones that are clear and consistent; people who expect clarity and consistency are more likely to perceive ambiguity than those who do not. In this paper, we focus on the first half of this interpretative relationship to consider how products and systems can be designed to elicit different kinds of ambiguity. In particular, we distinguish three principal kinds of ambiguity: ambiguity of information, of context, and of relationship. 

Ambiguity of Information

Let's start by looking at an old master: Leonardo da Vinci's Mona Lisa (c. 1503-07). This is a straightforward figurative painting. Why is it so famous? As Charles Nicolls wrote: 

We don't know precisely when it was painted, we don't know for certain who she is, and as we stare at her puzzling features for the umpteenth time we are inclined to ask ourselves: ‘what is it about her?’ [15] 

All this ambiguity is centred on her smile. In Leonardo's notes on painting, he says that light and shade should blend 'without lines or borders, in the the manner of smoke'. [13] This technique is called sfumato, and it accounts for the mystery of Mona Lisa's smile. By reducing the definition (or focus) around her lips, Leonardo makes her whole expression indeterminate, and thus a 'terrain for infinite variations' [17]. With insufficient information to go on, the viewer has to bring that smile into focus in their mind. 

Now consider an equally famous, modernist painting. Picasso's Guernica (1936) seems to work in the opposite way, by increasing the definition. The painting is full of strong 'lines and borders', rather like the figures in a cartoon strip. Yet this heightening of contrasts also results in loss of information, which produces a different kind of ambiguity. Are we to take these figures as portraits of unique individuals and animals, or as representations of generic types - that is to say, of ideas? And if each represents an idea, who's to say exactly which idea? The more one simplifies an image, the more iconic it becomes, and the more open to interpretation. As Read [16] points out, 'Does the bull represent the concept of violence, or the dictator Franco?' Again, the viewer has to decide. In order to make the image coherent, the viewer has to find a conceptual focus, as it were, which harmonises all the elements. 

In both these examples, ambiguity arises in the way that information is presented. Now consider the more complex example of an interactive system: 

Bystander is a prototype mixed reality game designed by one of the authors in collaboration with Blast Theory, a London performance arts group. In the game, two players, one online and the other equipped with mobile technologies, follow somebody moving through the city. Both have access to limited and different kinds of information. In particular, the mobile player’s location is tracked using GPS data, which is of low spatial and temporal resolution and also prone to errors. Thus the issue is not ‘What does this display mean?’ but ‘Do I trust it?’ – that is, how does the display correspond with reality? 

The traditional response to ambiguity of information in interactive systems like Bystander is to improve the technology, use statistical methods to set certainty thresholds, or ignore it and hope for the best. Bystander, in contrast, passes the ambiguity directly to players in the form of fuzzy avatars that hint at locations without specifying them. Rather than seeing uncertain GPS information (in this instance) as a flaw, Bystander treats this ambiguous information as a challenge to users, forcing them to join their knowledge of people and cities to the clues offered by the system in order to play the game. 

Ambiguity of Context

Ambiguity sometimes arises not because things are themselves unclear, but because they may be understood in different contexts, each suggesting different meanings. 

One of the most notorious examples of this is Duchamp’s Fountain, rejected from a 1917 exhibition (despite the organiser’s guarantee to show two pieces for the fee of $6) because it was a urinal turned on its side [11]. The Fountain is deeply controversial because it lends itself to several interpretations simultaneously. On the one hand, it is art: the work of one of the 20th century’s most celebrated artists, sold recently for more than one million dollars [3], and shown in internationally respected museums. On the other hand, it is a just a commodity: a mass manufactured ‘ready made,’ not created by Duchamp at all, and, to add insult to injury, a toilet. 

To view the Fountain – or just to think about it – is to enter into this deeply ambiguous situation. Seen as a sculpture, the Fountain’s graceful lines and intimate enclosure can be aesthetically pleasing. But it is, almost insistently, a urinal. Not only can it be perceived in different ways, but for many people these interpretations are incompatible. Attempts to resolve this tension can be absurd or violent, as when in 1993 a painter first urinated in the Fountain and then hit it several times with a hammer [3]. But this ambiguity and the tensions it evokes are the point of the piece: the source of its power and the conceptual pleasure it has to offer. 

It is not unusual to find artworks designed to be ambiguous. It is more difficult, in contrast, to find examples of commercial products that are ambiguous in terms of their preferred context of interpretation. Product designers work to eliminate ambiguity: their main effort goes into balancing clarity of use (making it intuitive) with richness of semiotic suggestion (making you like what it stands for). Both aspects of the design attempt to control the user's interpretation of the product – that is, to reduce ambiguity. 

However, now that technology is no longer used solely by specialists, with specialist requirements, its users are becoming ever more varied and its uses ever more flexible. Despite the best efforts of product designers, products and services are increasingly treated as if they were open to interpretation. Users will even go against the (semiotic) grain in order to reinterpret a product. Sometimes these reinterpretations will go beyond new applications of an understood product to redefine the very purpose of the thing itself, creating a contextual ambiguity around it. 

For example, the abundance of different ring tones on mobile phones is used by advertisers as an incentive to the youth market. But some mothers have now started playing with ring tones - not to be cool, but to soothe their babies. The mother sets the phone ringing and hands it to the wailing infant. Note that this does not simply involve an unexpected use of the phone to communicate. Instead, much as Duchamp transmuted a base urinal into a celebrated piece of art, so the phone has been transformed into a new kind of baby rattle. This reveals the ability to interpret mobile phones in terms of discourses alien to those of their designers – a possibility that designers can recognise and encourage. 

Beyond noting and encouraging novel reconceptualisations of existing technologies, however, designers can deliberately set out to create products that implicate several interpretations at once. When successful, this mingling of discourses disrupts easy interpretation of the design, and obliges users to work out ways to make sense of the new situation.

Ambiguity of Relationship

As an example of a third type of ambiguity, consider Van Lieshout’s Bais-ô-Drôme [1]. This is a ‘love caravan’ consisting of two molded polyester enclosures that are fitted together like an extended trailer. The nondescript and even foreboding exterior hides an interior that might be described as ‘functionally decadent.’ Liquor bottles are hung on the walls for easy access from a large, cushioned settee, while in the background a sheepskin-covered platform seems simultaneously clinical and sleazy. The whole is a well-constructed and integrated design that manages to leave viewers admiring but uncomfortable. 

There is nothing particularly unclear about the presentation of this piece. In addition, though it extends and merges known product genres in interesting ways, these seem to coexist without tension (though the Duchampian move of claiming a living space as art may trouble some viewers). The ambiguity, instead, arises from the viewer’s personal relationship with the piece. It is admirably well-crafted – but would you want to inhabit it? Under what circumstances? And should so much effort and care be devoted to such a strange mixture of utility and debauchery? 

Gaver and Martin [10] developed design proposals intended to produce a similar sort of self-examination. The Prayer Device, for example, transmits users’ voices straight up to the skies, allowing people to send their thoughts or supplications to whomever or whatever they think might listen. The Telegotchi is an electronic pet with no buttons, relying on psionic powers for influence. Both these designs work within understood contexts – of spirituality on the one hand, and telepathy on the other – and invite users to share the experience of believers. 

Designs like these do not simply engender ambivalence, or contradictory emotion. They push us to imagine how we might personally use such products, and what our lives would be like in consequence. As a result of this speculation, we form intellectual, aesthetic, emotional, and moral judgements that can become available for self reflection. The result of this process can be experiences that are uniquely personal: delightful, disturbing, or both. 

In summary, the three kinds of ambiguity raise different sorts of problem and ask for different sorts of interpretation. Ambiguity of information asks us to project our expectations into an interpretation of incomplete information. Ambiguity of context requires an integration of seemingly incompatible frames of reference. Ambiguity of relationship, finally, evokes a projection of our subjective experiences and attitudes onto new situations.

TACTICS FOR USING AMBIGUITY 

We chose the examples in the section above both to illustrate how ambiguity is used in the arts and design, and because they are relatively clear illustrations of the three primary loci of ambiguity. In this section, we discuss each kind of ambiguity in more detail, describing specific heuristics for achieving them with reference to our original design examples as well as new ones. Note that our intention here is not to present an exhaustive analysis (indeed we question whether such an analysis is feasible, or even desirable). Instead, we articulate these tactics to help designers recognise, understand and use ambiguity. 

Enhancing Ambiguity of Information

A number of tactics may be used to enhance ambiguity of information. These focus on creating or reflecting uncertainties about information that are in some way significant. The purpose may be merely to make the system seem mysterious and thus attractive, but more importantly it can also compel people to join in the work of making sense of a system and its context. 

Use imprecise representations to emphasise uncertainty. 
Perhaps the most prevalent way to introduce ambiguity of information is to display information that is physically or conceptually blurred. For instance, Desert Rain exploits ambiguity of information through the use of the rain curtain to create blurred and shifting images of the virtual world. This treatment is similar to Dunne’s use of a translucent plastic brick and pillow to obscure the graphics on an LCD display. In both cases, a kind of digital sfumato is achieved by blurring the usual precision of electronic displays. 
The use of deliberate imprecision can extend to tangible and textual displays as well. For instance, Jeremijenko’s LiveWire [18] used a spinning cable to indicate ethernet traffic, while Ishii [5] used pinwheels to indicate network load. The Home Health Monitor appropriates the tendency of horoscopes to use diectic wordings that make vague statements seem definite (e.g. “work to maintain the creative areas that are personally rewarding and cut your losses elsewhere”). The Slogan benches used short, decontextualised phrases to create a similar air of enigma (e.g. “I used to be restless because of negative thoughts”). Imprecise displays such as these are often described as ‘ambient’, but they are ambiguous as well. This ambiguity, we believe, is crucial for understanding their appeal: they may be perceptually undemanding, but they require users to fill in the gaps in information that is purposefully imprecise. When successful, such interfaces are not only aesthetically attractive, but conceptually appealing as well.

Over-interpret data to encourage speculation. 
The converse of using blurred representations of information is to over-interpret them (in much the same way that Guernica’s heightened definition contrasts with the indistinct features of the Mona Lisa). For instance, the Home Health Monitor uses over-interpretation in making statements about the emotional state of the home based on the input from physical sensors. The apparent overconfidence of the system raises questions about the degree to which such interpretations might be justified, seducing users into considering the well-being of their home through their scepticism about the truth of the system’s suggestions. 
Over-interpretations should not be outright nonsense, however. An earlier proposal for a Tweet-to-Text system using voice recognition to give pets the chance to speak [2] is questionable in this regard: it is difficult to suspend disbelief and entertain the notion that the results might be sensible. The design equivalent of gross exaggeration (e.g. “I’ve been working on this paper for a million years”), over-interpretation is best used to draw attention to possible truths rather than simple untruths.

Expose inconsistencies to create a space of interpretation. 
Inconsistent information from interfaces can also encourage interpretative engagement. For example, the Imagebank used in the Projected Realities system sometimes showed multiple, inconsistent images (e.g. a quiet family scene next to a protest march) to reflect inconsistent slogans appearing on the Sloganbenches. This had the effect of opening a space of possible interpretations – the juxtaposed images could be read as indicating the range of Bijlmer realities, or as a mutual rebuke, or as a narrative. However it was interpreted, the point is that it was interpreted, that the juxtaposition of incompatible elements required viewers to build their own meanings from the display. 
Exposing inconsistency between sources of information (e.g. external sensors) can also be a powerful alternative to trying to resolve or hide it. For instance, just as the uncertainties of GPS tracking in Bystander are revealed to participants, so are inconsistencies revealed between GPS and spoken information. By crafting the inherent limitations of the technology into the user experience, the designer can open a space of possibilities that participants must navigate, thus heightening narrative intrigue.

Cast doubt on sources to provoke independent assessment. 
Over-interpretation and inconsistency are special cases of increasing ambiguity by casting doubt on sources of information. For instance, not only are the Home Health ‘horoscopes’ imprecise, but they are produced by an unseen mapping from a pattern of sensor readings which have, in the first place, a questionable relationship to the statements being made. The result is to force users to decide for themselves the credence to put on the predictions, either by tracing back the chain of cause and effect in the system or more simply by gauging whether the statements match their experiences. 
Similarly, because the slogans displayed by the Slogan benches were not contextualised it was difficult on first viewing to recognise that they were produced by older people (this information spread by word of mouth as the system was used). Instead, they appeared simply as statements to be believed or disbelieved. In this they are similar to the artist Jenny Holzer’s Truisms (1977-9), electronic displays that show a series of bald assertions (e.g. ‘money creates taste’) that viewers can accept or question. The statements shown by the Slogan benches, however, could be traced back to the older people, and this tension between abstraction and individuality allowed spectators to consider them either simply as statements or as expressions of older people.

Creating Ambiguity of Context 

Blocking the interpretation of a product or system in terms of an established discourse creates ambiguity of context. This is useful in spurring people to approach a particular system with an open mind, and more generally to question the assumptions they have about technological genres.

Implicate incompatible contexts to disrupt preconceptions. 
Though none of our introductory design examples implicate incompatible contexts as powerfully as Duchamp’s Fountain, all use this tactic to some degree in interrupting an easy interpretation. The Sloganbenches are not quite public furniture or public displays, and treating them simply as one or the other is problematic (sitting on them blocks the displays; viewing the displays blocks sitting). The Pillow is simultaneously a radio and an aesthetic object. Desert Rain juxtaposes the established media forms of theatre, interactive installation and computer game, and moreover invites militaristic play despite being an anti-war piece. 
In each case, bringing together disparate contexts creates a tension that must be resolved. To engage with the design, participants must rethink their basic assumptions about given genres, and either privilege one discourse over the others or expand their understandings of the discourses to build bridges among them. In doing so, they are encouraged to confront the system – and perhaps even technological genres in general – from a fresh perspective.

Add incongruous functions to breach existing genres. 
Adding new functions to designs can sometimes move them out of their ‘home’ genres. From this perspective, the conceptual origin of the Sloganbenches as public furniture is apparent, but they have become something different through the addition of the scrolling displays. Accommodating this augmentation to the notion of public furniture is possible, but requires a redefinition that is fundamental enough to be uncomfortable. 
Similarly, products can split from their original genres when their functionality is used in radically new contexts, as in our example of mobile phones being used as baby rattles. For instance, The Sailor’s Return is a design proposal for a man who splits his time between an apartment and a two-masted sailing ship [2]. It suggests that his coffee cup could be linked wirelessly to a neon sign (picturing a coffee cup, of course) outside his apartment window. Returning from the ship and having a cup of coffee would cause the sign to light up, signalling to his friends and neighbours that he is home from the sea. Apart from casting the coffee cup as an activity monitor (a mixing of genres that is common in ubiquitous computing research), this proposal transforms a public sign into a private code, allowing us to rethink the potential of public displays in new ways. 

Block expected functionality to comment on familiar products. 
Taking away functionality can also separate designs from their native genres. This is yet another way to understand the effect of being able to obscure the Sloganbench displays by sitting on them. Another example of this tactic is a design proposal called Democratic Advertising [10], in which people could use handheld devices to capture and redistribute advertisements shown on public displays. This can be seen as a political device, allowing people unprecedented influence over the visual appearance of public spaces. Yet according to this proposal, people can only move existing advertisements, they cannot alter them or create their own imagery. This can seem frustrating, but it adds an intriguing contextual ambiguity. The system is not a straightforward tool for advertising, nor is it just a simple utopian proposal for legal graffiti; instead it finds a more delicate balance between the two. 
Perhaps the purest example of blocking functionality to achieve ambiguity of context is Sarah Pennington’s design of a mobile phone cover that has no ‘call’ or ‘receive’ buttons. The phone is transmuted into a device that can only signal when somebody is trying to call: the owner can’t pick up or make calls. Through this simple modification, Pennington disrupts our reading of the phone as a communications device, creating instead a rather plaintive reminder of separation. But the result doesn’t escape its origin as a phone: it is simultaneously phone and not-phone, and this ambiguity is central to its effect.

Provoking Ambiguity of Relationship

Ambiguity of relationship creates the condition for a deeply personal projection of imagination and values onto a design. This can allow products and systems to become psychological mirrors for people, allowing them to try on new identities or to question their values and activities. 

Offer unaccustomed roles to encourage imagination. 
By their aesthetics and the functionality they offer, products and systems imply a ‘narrative of use’ [6] and suggest the sorts of people for whom they are appropriate. Designers traditionally strive to craft the semiotics of their products so that a majority of people will relate or aspire to the identities they imply. Reflecting more idiosyncratic roles and activities, however, can give rise to products that create an ambiguity of relationship, spurring people to question their own values. 
Dunne’s Pillow [7] is a seminal example of applying ambiguity of relationship to electronic products. Culling electromagnetic information from sources that might include mobile phone calls or baby monitors, it entices people to assume a voyeuristic role amid the airwaves. Similarly, the Prayer Device and Telegotchi also encourage people to adopt potentially unfamiliar perspectives and activities. Described by Dunne [6] as ‘value fictions,’ these sorts of design use possible technologies to explore implausible values. They act as props for a drama played in everyday life, allowing people to engage in a radical first-person narrative as a kind of experiment in living. 

Point out things without explaining why. 
Offering new roles to people emphasises issues of personal identity. Another form of ambiguity of relationship, however, encourages people to consider the personal significance of things, behaviours, or events in their environment. Much as fine art photography has shifted from capturing images of important scenes to making scenes important by capturing their image, so design can draw attention to overlooked aspects of the environment to encourage reflection on their significance. 
For example, the rationale for tracking certain physical events for the Home Health Monitor is not apparent, but the mere fact of their being tracked may arouse curiosity among participants. The flip side of asking whether open doors and frequently-used hairbrushes really reflect wellbeing is to ask what these things do mean. In a similar way, our design for the History Tablecloth [2] uses load sensors and electroluminescent film printed on fabric to highlight locations of objects that have been left on household surfaces for days or weeks. Based in part on ethnographic observations of how people use household surfaces [4], the cloth encourages people to reflect on the different histories of objects in their environment. But their interpretation is left open: the Tablecloth purposely allows the meaning of its display to remain ambiguous to its users. In doing so, it encourages them to reflect on the meaning of this aspect of their environment, aesthetically, culturally, and – especially – personally. 

Introduce disturbing side effects to question responsibility. 
Reflection about the balance of desire and ethics can be provoked by designs that seem immediately appealing but which have disquieting implications. The Pillow works this way in providing an aesthetic experience that only slowly reveals itself as depending on eavesdropping: it seduces people into a voyeuristic role that may be uncomfortable. Another example, the Dawn Chorus, is a proposal for an artificially-intelligent feeder that uses operant conditioning principles to teach local birds new songs [10]. This whimsical design may be appealing, but on reflection it raises disturbing issues about the ecological effects of interfering with birds’ natural behaviour, not to mention the ability to broadcast one’s tastes (what if my neighbour is not a Britney Spears fan?). 
Designs such as these reflect and amplify the difficult choices posed by many current technologies. Mobile phones, for instance, allow us to communicate freely, but at the cost of intruding on others and of losing our solitude. Reactive environments may offer convenience at the cost of privacy. Portable computers interfere with the separation of work and home. Such tradeoffs are endemic to new technologies; proposals such as the Pillow and Dawn Chorus provoke us to reflect on these tradeoffs both in the particular and at the level of moral principles.

CONCLUSION: AMBIGUITY AS A VIRTUE

Ambiguity is not a virtue in itself, nor should it be used as an excuse for poor design. Many ambiguous systems are merely confusing, frustrating, or meaningless. Nonetheless, as we hope to have shown in this paper, it can be an important factor in crafting interactive designs that are engaging and thought-provoking. Moreover, it has the added advantage (which we have purposely avoided stressing in this paper) of enabling designers to go beyond the limits of their technologies. From this point of view, ambiguity provides a frame of reference that allows the use of inaccurate sensors, inexact mappings, and low-resolution displays because it encourages users to supplement them with their own interpretations and beliefs. 

The most important benefit of ambiguity, however, is the ability it gives designers to suggest issues and perspectives for consideration without imposing solutions. Ambiguity of information impels people to question for themselves the truth of a situation. Contextual ambiguity can question the discourses surrounding technological genres, allowing people to expand, bridge, or reject them as they see fit. Relational ambiguity, finally, can lead people to consider new beliefs and values, and ultimately their own attitudes. In each of these cases, ambiguity frees users to react to designs with scepticism or belief, appropriating systems into their own lives through their interpretations. In the process of reacting to the system either positively or negatively, however, users engage with issues that the designer suggests. Thus ambiguity is a powerful design tool for raising topics or asking questions, while renouncing the possibility of dictating answers. By virtue of this balance, ambiguity both offers an inspiring resource to designers and shows a deep respect for users. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

This work was supported by the EPSRC as part of the Equator IRC. We are grateful to Andy Boucher, Sarah Pennington Brendan Walker (the RCA Equator Team); Tony Dunne, Tom Roddin, Anne Schlottmann; and Phoebe Sengers (collaborator on the Home Health Monitor).

WHAT SHOULD WE EXPECT FROM RESEARCH THROUGH DESIGN?

ABSTRACT

In this essay, I explore several facets of research through design in order to contribute to discussions about how the approach should develop. The essay has three parts. In the first, I review two influential theories from the Philosophy of Science to help reflect on the nature of design theory, concluding that research through design is likely to produce theories that are provisional, contingent, and aspirational. In the second part, I discuss three possible interpretations for the diversity of approaches to research through design, and suggest that this variation need not be seen as a sign of inadequate standards or a lack of cumulative progress in the field, but may be natural for a generative endeavour. In the final section, I suggest that, rather than aiming to develop increasingly comprehensive theories of design, practice based research might better view theory as annotation of realised design examples, and particularly portfolios of related pieces. Overall, I suggest that the design research community should be wary of impulses towards convergence and standardisation, and instead take pride in its aptitude for exploring and speculating, particularising and diversifying, and - especially - its ability to manifest the results in the form of new, conceptually rich artefacts. 

Author Keywords
research through design; theory; annotation; portfolios; philosophy of science  

INTRODUCTION

Over the last number of years, design practitioners have become increasingly integrated within the HCI research community. Their work often takes the form of research through design [4, 11, 34], in which design practice is brought to bear on situations chosen for their topical and theoretical potential, the resulting designs are seen as embodying designers’ judgments about valid ways to address the possibilities and problems implicit in such situations, and reflection on these results allow a range of topical, procedural, pragmatic and conceptual insights to be articulated. The output of this work takes the form, primarily, of artefacts and systems, sometimes with associated accounts of how these are used in field tests, but increasingly includes a variety of methods, conceptual frameworks and theories presented separately from accounts of practice. 

As design practice has become more prevalent in CHI, however, there has also grown an undercurrent of questioning within the design community itself about the nature and standards of research through design [9, 31, 33, 35]. These discussions revolve around the desirability of 'integrating design research methods, approaches, and outcomes in HCI' [9] both as a way of consolidating knowledge and to establish criteria for research done from this perspective. This agenda calls for the development of agreed methodological standards, hand in hand with a firm theoretical foundation. Research through design, it is said, 'lacks clear expectations and standards for what constitutes "good" design research', and thus would benefit from 'some actionable metrics for bringing rigor in critique of design research' ([9] p824). The community should 'develop protocols, descriptions, and guidelines for its processes, procedures, and activities' in ways assumed to be 'like any other research approach' ([35] p317). In part, this depends on developing research through design as 'a proper research methodology that can produce relevant and rigorous theory' ([35] p316). Conceptual contributions, from this perspective, should exhibit 'a level of extensibility and verifiability' if they are to comprise 'theory designers can apply in research in practice' [33].

As a long-term practitioner of research through design, I have some sympathy with these concerns. Nonetheless, I am uneasy about some of the tendencies that seem to underlie both the diagnoses and the treatments that have been suggested. Seeking conformance to agreed-upon standards and processes may be a route towards disciplinary legitimacy within HCI, helping clarify expectations for research through design both within and outside the design community. There is a risk, however, that such standards might lead to a form of self-policing that would be overly restrictive of a form of research that I value for its ability to continually and creatively challenge status quo thinking. Moreover, insofar as HCI is prone to 'scientism' in its cultural assumptions (despite moves to legitimise other forms of research based, for instance, on the humanities [2], or to characterize it as a design discipline [7]), attempts to establish standards for research through design may adopt, or be interpreted in terms of, inappropriate 'scientific' models of research and theory for the field.

In this essay, my intention is to temper calls for disciplinary consolidation with remarks on what we might reasonably expect from research through design. First, I explore the kinds of theory that have been developed in association with design using two accounts of scientific theory drawn from the Philosophy of Science. Contrasting accounts are chosen to complicate notions of what makes theories 'scientific', in order to undermine any overly simple assumptions about how research should proceed, and to draw out fundamental features of the conceptual work that accompanies research through design. This comparison suggests that, instead of being extensible and verifiable, theory produced by research through design tends to be provisional, contingent and aspirational. Second, calls for standards, formalisation, protocols and guidelines assume that disciplinary convergence is a prerequisite for cumulative growth of understanding in design. I explore three perspectives on the lack of convergence in research through design, and suggest that, while one of these perspectives implies that the community should work towards greater shared understandings, the other two imply either that there is no problem to solve or that progress in this area will be marked by proliferation rather than agreement. Third, an emphasis on agreed-upon theories and methods seems to assume that these are the hallmark of a respectable research discipline, and that the production of an endless stream of design examples is an inadequate basis for its pursuit. I argue on the contrary that an endless string of design examples is precisely at the core of how design research should operate, and that the role of theory should be to annotate those examples rather than replace them.

THEORY IN RESEARCH THROUGH DESIGN

Conceptual work appears in many forms as a routine part of research through design work. Whenever practitioners describe their influences, discuss the rationales for design decisions, and articulate their assessment of what they have made and its importance, they engage in a form of implicit conceptual work by highlighting important issues, dimensions of similarity, and criteria for choices and success. To the extent these conceptual statements are articulated in general terms and applied to multiple examples, they become recognisable as theories in their own right. For instance, Djajadiningrat and his colleagues [6] develop a rich account of the importance of embodied movement that is substantially informed from reflections about a series of designs they and their students have produced. They start from a conceptual perspective that values bodily movement, but it is through consideration of the designs their students have made that they elaborate this theory. 

Design researchers often 'borrow' conceptual perspectives from other disciplines and discuss their applicability for design. Examples that are widespread in the design community include notions of affordances, context and situatedness [27] (cited in [31]). Borrowed theories (or concepts) are often used both to inspire new designs and to articulate existing ones. In doing so, the perspectives are usually translated for use by designers. For instance, when Wiltse and Stolterman [32] suggest that interaction design should draw on the sensibilities of architecture, they do not refer to physical spaces but rather the social spaces opened by computational media. Translation can ultimately give rise to new concepts. For instance, Overbeeke and Wensveen [23] describe how they originally drew inspiration from Gibson's ecological psychology (e.g. [15]), and particularly the notion of affordances, but adapted this to focus on emotional appeal under the new name of 'irresistables'.

Manifestos are a third form of theory often produced as a part of research through design practice. These go beyond theoretical treatments drawn from other disciplines or developed from reflection on practice to suggest certain approaches to design as both as desirable and productive of future practice [13, 14, 16, 30, 36]. For example, in introducing their notion of 'Reflective Design', Sengers and her colleagues [30] suggest that 'reflection on unconscious values embedded in computing and the practices that it supports can and should be a core principle of technology design'. Similarly, Gaver advocated a ludic approach to design as 'an antidote to assumptions that technology should provide clear, efficient solutions to practical problems' [13]. Typically, such manifestos will describe design practice to illustrate their approach, and borrow theories to justify it, but their primary function is to build an account of a practice to be pursued in the future.

Frameworks for design play a similar role to manifestos, but tend to downplay both their theoretical commitments and normative stance. For example, Forlizzi's Product Ecology [10] outlines a number of factors involved in designing for products to be used together and suggests methods to approach each stage. The framework is intended to allow 'flexible, design-centred research planning and opportunity seeking', and avoids prescribing appropriate methods. In characterising a class of design situations as it does, however, and in its ontology for describing the factors involved, the framework nevertheless implies a conceptual orientation, and can be considered a form of theoretical output from research through design. 

A final genre of theory from research through design seeks to characterise research through design itself, and often to suggest normative standards for how research through design should be conducted, what should 'count' as research through design, and the appropriate standards for work done in this way. For instance, Zimmerman & Forlizzi [34] argue that the HCI community will more easily accept contributions from research through design if it has an 'agreed upon form of practice, evaluation, and outcome' and suggest this should come through the development of 'extensible, systemic approaches' to theory development. Stolterman [31], in contrast, highlights the tendency for design to produce ultimate particulars, and suggests this poses problems for developing generalisable theories. Although these sorts of treatments can be considered as wide-ranging manifestos, this essay – which itself is intended as a contribution to meta-theory – addresses the more specific, content-oriented theories described earlier.

Arguably, designers in the HCI community have produced an ample amount of conceptual work arising from articulations of practice, borrowed ideas, manifestos and frameworks. But how good is this conceptual work? Should we be proud of the corpus of conceptualisations that have grown, or is there something inadequate about our achievements? To explore these questions, I compare the theories produced by research through design with several influential accounts of scientific theory.

SCIENTIFIC AND DESIGN THEORIES

In this section, I describe two contrasting accounts from the Philosophy of Science, primarily to shed light on the characteristics of research through design, but also to problematise the (potentially tacit) accounts of science that seem to underlie some views of research. Although other accounts of theory, for instance from the humanities, can also shed valuable light on design [2], there are several reasons why accounts of scientific theory are a useful foil against which to consider the conceptual work produced as a result of design practice. First, fields such as the Philosophy of Science and Science and Technology Studies (STS) offer sophisticated and well-developed discussions of the nature of theory and how it operates within a scientific context (see [5] for a valuable overview) which may serve as a fertile source of insight about theory in any field. In addition, one of the fundamental issues addressed within the Philosophy of Science concerns how to distinguish scientific fields from non-scientific ones (occasioned, for example, by arguments about evolution v. 'creation science'). These discussions highlight a number of issues that can be useful in considering the nature of design as a research endeavour, and the likely characteristics of theory likely to appear as a result of that endeavour. 

Falsifiability
 
One influential account of science holds that 'the criterion of the scientific status of a theory is its falsifiability, or refutability, or testability' [24] (emphasis in the original). Popper proposed this criterion as a corrective to notions that scientific theories are primarily produced by induction, and thus are more powerful the more phenomena they agree with. As he notes, 'It is easy to obtain confirmations, or verifications, for nearly every theory—if we look for confirmations' ([24] p 7). But an endless number of confirmations cannot prove a theory. In fact, according to Popper the probability that a particular theory is correct is zero no matter how much positive evidence is amassed (see [5] p. 70). In contrast, Popper suggests, a single incompatible result can disprove a theory. Feynman [8] makes a similar point in describing the search for a new physical law: 

First we guess it. Then we compute the consequences of the guess to see what would be implied if this law that we guessed is right. Then we compare the result of the computation to nature, with experiment or experience, compare it directly with observation, to see if it works. If it disagrees with experiment it is wrong. In that simple statement is the key to science. [8] p. 156 

From this perspective, the scientific process creates a kind of artificial evolution of theories: by eliminating weaker theories, only the strongest survive. Popper's point is that, for this to work, theories must be falsifiable in principle: "irrefutability is not a virtue of a theory (as people often think) but a vice' ([24], p. 7).

Scientific Research Programmes

Popper's emphasis on falsifiability, though influential in popular accounts of scientific reasoning, has been widely criticised as an inaccurate description of scientific practice. According to Kuhn [17], for example, 'normal science' involves 'puzzle-solving', in which researchers apply accepted theories to known problems or new domains. In normal circumstances, 'failure to solve a problem… is considered the fault of the scientist using the theory, not the fault of the theory itself' ([17] p 67). 

Moreover, the idea that scientific theories are rejected when evidence contradicts them is historically inaccurate. Even new theories may not accord with data. Newton, for example, admitted when he published his gravitational theory that it could not account for the moon's orbit [3]. Feynman [8] describes how a new theory can win out over established evidence in recounting how the equations for 'weak decay' were established, in a passage striking for its inconsistency with his previous account: 

…only the equation was guessed. The special difficulty this time was that the experiments were all wrong. How can you guess the right answer if, when you calculate the result, it disagrees with experiment? You need courage to say the experiments must be wrong. [8] p. 163. 

How can scientists find the courage to champion theories over evidence? Lakatos [19] proposes an alternative account of scientific activity that emphasises scientific research programmes rather than individual theories. Programmes, according to his account, are characterised by a 'hard core' of theory, surrounded by a 'protective belt' of auxiliary hypotheses, and a 'powerful problem-solving mechanism' used to generate evidence and make it compatible with theory. In Lakatos' description, using these components a research programme 'digests anomolies and even turns them into positive evidence' ([19] p. 24). Programmes can change and evolve to adapt to new evidence, not by altering the 'hard core' of theory, but the 'protective belt' that surrounds it. For example, when Uranus was discovered not to move as predicted by Newtonian theory, rather than rejecting the theory, scientists predicted the discovery of the planet Neptune [5]. 

The ability for contradictory evidence to be turned into novel discoveries by research programmes is key to Lakatos' account. For him, research programmes do not succeed because they are unchallenged by disconfirming evidence. Instead, he writes: 

…all the research programmes I admire have one characteristic in common. They all predict novel facts, facts which had been either undreamt of, or have indeed been contradicted by previous or rival programmes. ([19] p. 24). 

Lakatos' account of scientific research programmes paints a very different picture of science from the Popperian one: instead of stressing scientific activity as a matter of trying to discredit theories, it emphasises scientific research as a dynamic machine for generating new knowledge, new understandings and new discoveries. 

Why Design Theory is Unfalsifiable 

Research through design is clearly unscientific if Popper's [24] criterion of falsifiablity is accepted. Theories are too vague, and practice is usually intended to confirm theories, not falsify them. To be sure, Popper's account is widely criticised both in Philosophy of Science and by practicing scientists. Still, it holds a potentially unflattering mirror up to the theories produced as a part of research through design. If confirmation cannot be used as proof, how do we validate them? Rather than seeing difficulties in validation as a problem for design theory, I would suggest this reveals two important characteristics of the conceptual work produced in association with research through design. 

Theory Underspecifies Design 

Design often addresses wicked problems [26] which are complex enough that no correct solutions exist a priori and for which formulating the situation is integral to addressing it. Moreover, design is an activity that involves many different decisions, dealing with many different and potentially independent factors of an artefact, all situated within the specific circumstances of production and use (c.f. [7]. Finally, is productive in the sense that it changes the context of its own activities [21]. In short, theory by necessity under-specifies design activities.

The implication of this underspecification is that the theories produced by research through design are not falsifiable in principle. Whether they build on borrowed theory or observation of the world or of specific design examples, such theories take the form designing for X can lead to successful outcomes, where X may be 'the self' [36], 'homo ludens' [13], 'suppleness' [16], or 'simultaneous analogue control of multiple parameters' [6]. The problem is, the argument is not that X will always lead to successful designs (however success is evaluated), which would clearly be open to refutation. How could it be? There are too many other factors involved in a design project to make that kind of guarantee. Instead, there is always an implicit sometimes in statements about how to design successfully, to reflect the myriad of factors that remain untheorised yet crucial to a project's success. Assertions that X will sometimes lead to successful outcomes, however, are unfalsifiable, because no number of unsuccessful design efforts would actually disprove the assertion—after all, the next attempt might be successful.

Underspecification makes falsification difficult in practice as well as in principle. Even where potentially falsifiable assertions are offered, tests which are simultaneously unambiguous and ecologically valid are inconceivable. Consider, for example, a key claim made in a paper arguing for the benefits of ambiguity in design:

By impelling people to interpret situations for themselves, [ambiguity] encourages them to start grappling conceptually with systems and their contexts, and thus to establish deeper and more personal relations with the meanings offered by those systems. [14].

Although this is in principle a falsifiable statement, testing it in the Popperian sense would mean arranging a comparison in which no difference in conceptual grappling, or the depth and intimacy of personal relations to meaning, could be established between comparable ambiguous and unambiguous systems. The problem is in determining how to construct such a systems to be 'comparable'. Simply tweaking an unambiguous system to be ambiguous might address the assertion in a narrow sense, but it would be unrepresentative of the ways designers harness untheorised factors of a design to support its intended effects. In other words, the synthetic nature of design is incompatible with the controlled experiments useful for theory testing.

Design Is Generative 

What I am arguing is that if designers were to change their practices to design for comparison or refutation, they would no longer be doing research through design. The notion of making falsifiable statements, or of arranging tests to refute such statements, runs against the grain of the methodological approach of research through design. Design, and research through design, is generative. Rather than making statements about what is, design is concerned with creating what might be, and moreover, in Zimmerman et al.'s [34] formulation, on making the 'right thing'. 

The issue for designers is not to show that design theory can sometimes lead to bad designs. On the contrary, their concern is to sometimes create good ones. Similarly, the goal of conceptual work in research through design is not to develop theories that are never wrong, it is to create Session: Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA 940 theories that are sometimes right. As Stolterman [31] puts it, 'designers can be prepared-for-action but not guided-inaction by detailed prescriptive procedures' (p 61). The generative nature of design has deeper implications for research through design, as I will argue later. For now, it is enough to note that, from Popper's perspective, one of the features that distinguishes design from science is its tendency to make generative statements rather than falsifiable ones. 

Lakatos' characterisation of scientific research programmes, in contrast, paints a picture of theory seems more compatible with the nature of research through design. From this perspective, it is of little matter that conceptual approaches such as 'Reflective Design' [30] or 'Supple Interfaces' [16] or 'Designing for the Self' [36] are not falsifiable. Instead, what is at stake is their ability to inspire new designs. It is understandable why so many design manifestos, or examples of borrowed theory, are accompanied by examples of realised designs. What Popper would reject as 'merely' confirmatory evidence is, from this point of view, testimony to the fertility of the overarching theory. The difficulty of verifying design theory, at least through falsification, is not a flaw for research through design, as long as that theory can lead to productive research programmes.

Theory from Research Through Design

To be clear, I am not presenting Popper's and Lakatos' accounts as particularly representative of Philosophy of Science. In fact, by extracting these accounts from that complex and dynamic field, I wish in part to illustrate how unsettled and controversial accounts of science are. This lack of resolution, I would suggest, undermines attempts to characterise research through design (or design in general) either as a science or as a non-science. Personally, I tend to think that the nature of design practice and research is distinct from the ideals, and often practice, of science – but in the end, whether research through design can be considered a science depends on the account of science one adopts. Similarly, taking seriously the disagreements about the nature of science subverts any easy scientism in HCI more generally, because it destabilises the use of 'science' as shorthand for a set of practices and criteria assumed to be desirable. It is difficult to call for research to be more scientific if what it means to be scientific is under question (see [29]).

Instead, what this discussion suggests is the desirability of clearly articulating the methodological and conceptual features of current research through design practice, as well as the standards one might want to advocate for them. Here I have suggested that the theory produced from design practice tends to underspecify practice and to be generative in nature, and thus that it is provisional, contingent, and aspirational. These are all features that limit the potential 'extensibility and verifiability' of design theory, seen by some as possible and desirable. Instead, as I discuss in the remainder of this paper, research through design should be appreciated for its proliferation of new realities, and its theory considered as annotation of the artefacts that are its fundamental achievement. 

CONVERGENCE IN RESEARCH THROUGH DESIGN 

Calls for disciplinary reform in research through design appeal for more agreement about the 'methods, approaches, and outcomes' in the field. Greater integration would make assessment of new contributions fairer and more rigorous. Moreover, if we could all agree about the proper approaches, methods and outcomes to use, we could build upon one another's research in a cumulative fashion. Currently, however, there must be dozens of different 'manifestos' for design, each seeking to establish a research programme, and each with its own configuration of goals, issues, methods and realised exemplars. Why is there not more convergence in the field?

Convergence in the natural sciences is a given. Lakatos' research programmes, for example, describe scientific research in terms of historical movements in which researchers share a common set of practices and understandings. A similar description is developed by Kuhn [17] in his seminal account of 'scientific revolutions'. According to Kuhn, the reason 'normal science' can proceed is because researchers share a common paradigm, which, in Kuhn's usage, sometimes means an exemplar of successful research, and sometimes a set of common understandings about how to describe relevant phenomena, relevant issues, acceptable methodologies and outputs. Both accounts describe scientific research as convergent.

Even more striking, however, Lakatos' and Kuhn's accounts both suggest that, as a normal state of affairs, only one programme or paradigm will dominate a particular scientific field at any one time. Aristotelian physics gives way to Newtonian physics, which gives way in its turn to Relativity. For Kuhn, paradigm shifts occur when tension grows about a given paradigm's inability to resolve anomalies, a new possible view arises which solves those anomalies (or makes them irrelevant) and scientists choose to join the new paradigm. Because paradigms involve different 'world views', including ontologies, philosophies, methodologies, etc., choosing between two candidates cannot be done on rational grounds, according to Kuhn. Lakatos objects to this, suggesting the relative productivity of competing programmes as the grounds for scientists' choice amongst them. Both agree, however, that multiple programmes, or paradigms, cannot co-exist over time. 

Why do multiple research programmes coexist in design? In the following sections I explore three possibilities.

Design as Pre-paradigmatic Research

According to Kuhn [17], the beginning of a scientific study of a given field comes with the widespread adoption of a single paradigm for its study. Until that time, research is characterised by competition amongst a number of different schools of thought, usually drawing on different philosophical foundations and orienting towards the field in Session: Critical Perspectives on Design CHI 2012, May 5–10, 2012, Austin, Texas, USA 941 different ways. Valuable contributions may be made by disparate approaches, but without shared assumptions about the correct way to approach a field, individual researchers must establish the rationale behind their approach from the very basics every time they seek to make a contribution. Because there are no agreed standards of importance, there is little sense of priority or order to the findings that are amassed. Progress is slow and in Kuhn's view does not really add up to a science. 

When a particularly influential body of research is finally established, usually in the form of a theory that ties together multiple troublesome phenomena and suggests new paths for research, everything changes. Researchers no longer need to justify the basics of their research, but can concentrate on increasingly detailed and exacting contributions. They become more confident about devoting resources on studies which are difficult and timeconsuming, since they know they will be understood and valued by their fellow researchers. In general, working together on the issues suggested by a given paradigm, and using methods and techniques suggested by it, allows science to make significant progress. Pre-paradigmatic research, in contrast, must founder.

It is clearly possible to recognise the current state of research through design in this description of affairs. There is a proliferation of research programmes, and little agreement about the values for which we should design, the appropriate methods for doing so, standards for evaluation or agreed forms of output. Methods and techniques proliferate, and when they are taken up by others it is often without their underlying methodological orientation. Even what it means to undertake research as a form of design is subject to disagreement, with some suggesting that design projects should be constructed, in part, to explicitly test and produce theory [33, 35], while others (including myself) believe that theory should be allowed to emerge from situated design practice. 

From this perspective, research through design lacks a shared paradigm. Without it, we cannot join forces around agreed issues, or find common standards for work we agree is solid enough to build upon: research through design cannot make progress. This is a tempting conclusion, one seemingly behind recent calls for formalism and standardisation [9, 35]. Two other accounts, however, may also explain the seeming disunity of research through design when compared to research in the natural sciences. 

The Invisibility of Consensus 

One alternative account to that of the supposed preparadigmatic nature of research through design would suggest that the balance of agreement and controversy is not so different in research through design than it is in many fields of scientific research. This interpretation hinges on the observation that consensus is usually easier to see from a distance than it is to experience from within. After all, as Kuhn [17] suggests, researchers do not need continually to restate the agreed fundamentals of their field. Instead their discourse tends to focus on controversies and debates around new findings and unresolved anomalies. From this perspective, scientific discourse may be characterised by far more controversy than is implied by Kuhn's account of normal, paradigm-driven research, and there may be more of a shared sense of understanding guiding research through design, than sometimes seems apparent.

If the natural sciences appear unified to an extraordinary degree, able to build upon a solid foundation of agreed knowledge, this may be a function of their presentation in the popular media, particularly with the advantage of hindsight. In contrast to Kuhn's characterisation of normal science as consisting of 'puzzle solving', other researchers paint a less cozy picture of scientific discourse. Bruno Latour [20], for instance, characterises scientific activity in terms of controversy in his description of the networks, instruments, inscriptions and theories deployed by scientists to gain acceptance for their ideas. Accounts such as this suggest that, although scientific work may be based on many fundamental agreements about how that work should be conducted, as Lakatos [19] and Kuhn [17, 18] suggest, the day-to-day scientific discourse may well exhibit just as much uncertainty, interpretation and debate as does research through design.

Conversely, research through design may come much closer to comprising a research programme, or sharing a paradigm (or set of paradigms) than we appreciate. After all, most of us working in research through design seem to share a set of common values. For instance, most pursue some variation on user-centred design, agreeing that some contact with the potential audiences for the things we make is desirable before, during or after design work itself. Most of us assume that exploring a wide space of potential designs, whether through sketching, scenarios, narratives or design proposals, is crucial in achieving a good outcome. Most of us appreciate the value of craft and detail in our work. Most fundamentally, most of us agree that the practice of making is a route to discovery, and that the synthetic nature of design allows for richer and more situated understandings than those produced through more analytic means. Perhaps we do not all agree with all of these assumptions all of the time, and perhaps it is endemic to design that all assumptions should be tested, but there certainly seems to be the outlines of a broad consensus underlying research through design.

Again, the shared assumptions underlying research through design practice are precisely those unlikely to be addressed in the literature. It is the speculative ideas, the novel, and the disagreements that we are most likely to discuss. This may lead us to underestimate the discord of science, however, and to overestimate the divergence of research through design. From this point of view, calls for standardisation, formalisation, overarching theory and the like are misplaced; we already share many of the attributes of a research paradigm, and seeking to reduce diversity its cutting edge will just inhibit progress.

The Many Worlds of Design 

There is yet another possible interpretation for the apparent lack of convergence in research through design, which sidesteps the opposing views that we either need a shared paradigm to make progress, or already have a shared paradigm and need to recognise controversy as a sign of progress. In this view, whether or not research through design is built on certain assumptions about its conduct, it will inevitably be characterised by greater diversity and less convergence than the natural sciences because of the inherent nature of its field of study. 

Many other fields lack the convergence seen over time in the natural sciences. For instance, Kuhn explains that his account of the paradigmatic nature of the natural sciences was inspired in part by the continual disagreements he witnessed amongst social scientists ([17]; c.f. [3]). Multiple schools co-exist in the arts, architecture, fashion and product design. In all these fields, controversies are seldom settled in such a way that new work can build on accepted results, the way science seems to do. Instead, new artistic movements overturn the basic values of their predecessors, hemlines go up and down, and even the most basic of household fittings are the subject of continual redesign and rethinking. These disciplines do not converge as the sciences do; instead they are cumulative in the way a conversation is, elaborating on what has gone before, but seldom aiming for or finding resolution. Why do disciplines such as these fail to show the convergence of science?

For the natural sciences, there is a strong presumption that the object of study is a single, unitary world that pre-exists and is independent of its observers. This core belief seems naturally to lead to convergence, simply because, if there are two incompatible accounts of the same physical domain, one must be better than the other (see [18] for one definition of 'better'). Research and practice in design and the arts, in contrast, do not describe a single, independent world, they are generative, investigating how to create new ones. Debates may rage about 'better' ways to go about this, but these cannot refer to evidence from a single, independent world as an ally (c.f. [20]). Multiple, incompatible worlds co-exist routinely for these fields.

Moreover, design and the arts change the context in which they operate. When the original iPad was designed, for instance, tablet computers were not widely known or available. Now anybody seeking to research or develop tablet computers – or anything at all, for that matter – is designing for a different world, one in which the iPad exists. One of the implications of the way generative disciplines change the context in which they work is that this sets the conditions for a feedback loop in which the development (and adoption) of a new design sets the scene for the development of variations, accessories, applications and reactions: whole new areas of reality. Another implication is that development in these fields does not just take the form of accumulation of incontrovertible results, but of reactions, reconsiderations and fresh beginnings. 

Social sciences, too, change the world in which they operate. Osborne and Rose [22] for example, describe how the development of public opinion research gave rise to public opinion itself, as something to be identified, measured, and considered in policy formation and product development. Law and Urry [21] observe that labelling theory, as proposed by deviance theorists, led to policies of de-institutionalisation, and suggest that by bringing social inequality into view, British sociologists gave rise to the policies intended to address it. The social world, in this view, is not the subject of objective, independent observation. Instead: 

"…different research practices might be making multiple worlds, and that such worlds might be equally valid, equally true, but simply unlike one another.' [21] p. 397.

If research is performative in this way, they suggest, then the research is no longer concerned primarily with epistemology (how we know about our object of study) but also involves 'ontological politics', a concern with what is being made. 

From this point of view, the reason that research through design is not convergent is that it is a generative discipline, able to create multiple new worlds rather than describing a single existing one. Its practitioners may share many assumptions about how to pursue it, but equally, they may build as many incompatible worlds as they wish to live in. We may wish to improve the standards of research within the field, but from this perspective we should realise that what we mean by 'improve', what criteria we propose, even the assumption that shared standards are necessary, possible or desirable, are potentially repressive acts of ontological politics.

THEORY AS ANNOTATION 

What is an appropriate role for theory in research through design? On the one hand, it is plausible to argue that if design is to contribute to HCI research, we should turn greater attention to theory-making both as a way of capturing and communicating new learning to the research community and as a way of guiding design practice [33, 35]. Most practicing designers, however, do not engage with major theoretical approaches in HCI. Instead, they use a more eclectic mix of design techniques and orienting concepts ([27] cited in [31]). In addition, designers often turn to existing examples of design to inform the development of their own ideas. Why might this be so? I suggest it is both because of the provisional nature of theory, and the definite nature of designed artefacts.

As I have suggested, a great deal of design theory tends to be generative and suggestive, rather than verifiable through falsification. This seems self-evident in the case of 'manifestos', but also of more grounded generalisations from particular design examples (e.g. [6]). The problem here is not just that theory underspecifies design, so that practitioners will be faced by innumerable decisions whatever theory they use, but that theory is underspecified by design, in the sense that many aspects of a successful design will not be captured by a given theory. Thus in order to understand accounts of how to achieve simultaneous control over multiple functions successfully, for example, it is useful to consider specific designs such as a rotary controller for a microwave oven [6]. 

Design examples are indispensible to design theory because artefacts embody the myriad choices made by their designers with a definiteness and level of detail that would be difficult or impossible to attain in a written (or diagrammatic) account. As Stolterman [31] suggests, design is concerned with the 'ultimate particular', a concept, he suggests, that has 'the same dignity and importance as truth in science' ([31] p. 59). Theories may be provisional, but designed artefacts (as opposed to demonstrators, for example) are not. As Carroll and Kellogg [3] have argued, a designed artifact is a 'theory nexus': the choices made by designers reveal both the issues they think are important, and their beliefs about the right way to address those issues. The implicit theories embodied in objects, from this perspective, range from the philosophical (what values should designs serve?) to the functional (how should those values be achieved in interaction) to the social (what will the people who use this be like?) to the aesthetic (what form and appearance is appropriate for the context?). Moreover, artefacts do not address these issues analytically, but represent the designer's best judgement about how to address the particular configuration of issues in question. 

Another metaphor for much the same point is that designs can be seen as occupying a point in design space, or perhaps more accurately creating a design space around themselves (see [12]). In this account, designers can explore the implications of a given design by moving around the point it inhabits to explore new design possibilities, or even by jumping away from it along understood dimensions, whether to apply some of the same decisions to new domains or to react against them.

If artefacts embody theory, however, they do not encode it, and if they occupy a point in a design space, they do not highlight the salient or fruitful dimensions of variation that space offers. One of the valuable roles of design theory, from this perspective, is in making accessible the kinds of decisions and rationales that comprise an artefact's embodied theory, or give dimensionality to its design space. In this case, however, then instead of theories predominating, with design examples serving as mere illustrations, design theory is best considered a form of annotation, serving to explain and point to features of 'ultimate particulars', the truths of design.

Annotated Portfolios 

Beyond single artefacts, however, annotated portfolios may serve an even more valuable role as an alternative to more formalised theory in conceptual development and practical guidance for design1 . If a single design occupies a point in design space, a collection of designs by the same or associated designers – a portfolio – establishes an area in that space. Comparing different individual items can make clear a domain of design, its relevant dimensions, and the designer's opinion about the relevant places and configurations to adopt on those dimensions (c.f. [7]). To put it another way, multiple examples can start to tease the individual concerns and judgements involved in a single situated design out of the particular configuration to which they were applied, making clear both the dimensions along which a designer's choices may range and the invariances among them.

As artefacts are to theory, from this perspective, design portfolios are to research programmes . For instance, Dieter Rams' work for Braun and Vitsoe has been characterised as 'defining an elegant, legible, yet rigorous visual language for its products' (www.designmuseum.org/design/dieterrams), but to appreciate what this might mean one must turn to a portfolio of his work (Figure 1). Comparing the variety of stereo equipment, kitchenware and grooming appliances that he designed, one begins to appreciate the qualities that hold across the examples, and those that are more particular to specific designs. Rams offered a particular form of conceptual writing to help with this, defining his approach to 'good design' in ten concise principles (e.g. 'good design is unobtrusive', 'good design is thorough down to the last detail') accompanied by short explanations. These annotate the portfolio, drawing attention to important features and to salient details that might otherwise be overlooked. The passages may seem too terse to serve as substantial conceptual contributions by themselves, but in the presence of the portfolio, they give a strong sense of Rams' style and philosophy. One can imagine 'designing in the style of Dieter Rams' without the need for a detailed formal theory to direct decisions.

The notion of annotated portfolios is not a formal one. What is defining to the concept is not how materials are presented, but that a balance is achieved between descriptions of specific, detailed examples of design practice, and articulations of the issues, values and themes which characterise the relations among the collection, and to which the examples suggest answers. The appropriate presentation of an annotated portfolio may vary depending on material, purpose and audience. For instance, the detailed annotations shown in Figure 1 are extremely compact and focus more on highlighting features of the artefacts than on elaborating the overarching conceptual themes. A different presentation of Rams' work, at www.vitsoe.com, emphasises his design principles over the portfolio of products themselves. A more detailed examination of Rams' philosophy might well take the form of an illustrated essay. What links all these presentations is the mutually informative juxtaposition of conceptual annotations with specific design examples, in such a way that neither dominates, and neither is subservient. 

Annotated portfolios are, in several respects, the converse of Alexander's [1] design patterns. They are not intended to abstract regularities from repeated attempts to design for the same domains. Instead, they maintain the particularity of individual examples, while articulating the ideas and issues that join and differentiate them. Juxtaposing designs with annotations supports appreciation of the conceptual dimensions of designs on the one hand, and, by yoking them to particular design manifestations, grounds and specifies theoretical concepts on the other. Portfolios can support multiple conceptual perspectives, and similar perspectives can be applied to different portfolios, reflecting the lack of convergence in the field as a virtue. Most fundamentally, annotated portfolios respect the 'ultimate particular' of the designed artefact, rather than abstracting across instances as pattern languages do, while allowing for the 'extensibility and verifiability' for which some of the HCI design community have called. 

I am not proposing here that annotated portfolios subsume all other forms of design theory. Theoretical writing remains important in articulating the issues, rationales, and lessons that are embodied by design, particularly for an interdisciplinary audience. I am suggesting, however, that we develop annotated portfolios as a serious form of theoretical contribution appropriate to research through design. More fundamentally, I am suggesting that, however valuable generalised theories may be, their role is limited to inspiration and annotation. It is the artefacts we create that are the definite facts of research through design.

CONCLUSION

In this essay, I have explored some of the issues that complicate calls for disciplinary consolidation in the HCI research through design community. 

First, I suggest that we should moderate expectations of creating extensible and verifiable theory. Comparisons with accounts from the Philosophy of Science indicate both how provisional, contingent and aspirational design theories tend to be, but also how such conceptual work may nonetheless inspire thriving research programmes. In addition, continuing controversies about how to characterise science should help undermine assumptions about research that draw on HCI's tendencies towards scientism. Finally, they also indicate the futility of debating whether design is or should be a science. Rather than worrying about accepting or rejecting some ideal version of 'science', I suggest, we should reflect on the appropriate ways to pursue our research on its own terms.

Second, I suggest that attempts to establish disciplinary norms of process or outcome are political acts to be approached with care. Considering possible accounts of a lack of convergence in research through design suggests that greater consensus may be emerging in research through design than is sometimes acknowledged. At the same time, convergence may not be the only or best model for progress. Research through design may develop not only through increasing agreement, but also through discursiveness and elaboration. We may build on one another's results, but we can also usefully subvert them, suggest alternatives, or establish entirely new constructions, and this applies equally to our concepts, methods, processes, artefacts and approaches to evaluation. From this perspective, consensus can come to look like constraint.

Finally, I have advocated the recognition of annotated portfolios as a way of reflecting and valuing the particular nature of design theory and practice. These, I suggest, allow design theory's provisionality, specificity and diversity to be turned to advantage through grounding in specific sets of detailed design examples. They may provide a way to further our ambitions to produce relevant and rigorous theoretical work, while allowing multiple perspectives to flourish. Best of all, emphasising theory as the annotation of portfolios offers respect to the endless string of design examples that should remain at the heart of our work. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This research was supported by the European Research Council's Advanced Investigator Award no. 226528, 'ThirdWaveHCI'. Many thanks go to Phoebe Sengers, Anne Schlottmann and especially John Bowers for comments and suggestions. I am also grateful to reviewers for their thoughtful critiques, particularly the anonymous R4, who recognised that this essay addresses, in part, 'an elephant in the room...: the move towards "scientism" in HCI'. 

ANNOTATED PORTFOLIOS

A few years ago our team was involved in a project designing for older people living in a care home. Having known the residents for over a year, we appreciated the complex mix of loneliness and sociality, withdrawal and interaction, humor and sadness that characterized their lives. Over that time, we had sketched numerous ideas, produced design workbooks, and even run a daylong session in which they tried a number of lo-fi experience prototypes. Now it was time for us to develop a specific design. What would we make? 

You might expect that we turned to theory for direction—after all, our studio routinely produces and engages with theoretical work. And indeed, we did have some conceptual themes we wanted to exercise through the project. Our theoretical convictions, however, turned out to give very little guidance about what, specifically, we should make. 

In the end, we developed a trolley called the Photostroller that shows a continuous slideshow of photographs scraped from the Web, using a controller that enables users to select from a set of predefined categories and tune the degree of “semantic drift” between successive images (Figure 1). We deployed the device in the care home for several months and found that our design supported a range of engagements in the home. Sometimes it fueled conversations in the lounge; other times it was a source of contemplation for a person alone in his room. Overall, the design seemed successful, embodying many of the qualities we wanted. 

Still, it is questionable how much anything one might call theory was of direct help in coming up with the design. Instead, we drew from a variety of concrete examples of other work for inspiration. For instance, one of our collaborators, Mark Blythe, had been running Web-browsing sessions with the care-home residents, and they had shown interest in the kinds of photographs found on Flickr. We had also witnessed their enthusiastic reception of photographs we collected to show them in a lo-fi prototyping session we ran. Influence also came from specific designs we knew—such as our own Local Barometer, or the Listening Post by Ben Ruben and Mark Hanson—that focused on reframing content taken from the Web. And as we finalized the design, we were deeply influenced by Dieter Rams’s design work for Braun. 

Theoretical reflection might have been helpful in emphasizing the sorts of qualities we wanted for our design. But our design choices were underdetermined by theory—we could have developed any number of things that would have been in accord with our ideas. Instead, it was by looking at specific examples of practice that we found guidance for our work and, in discussing exactly how those examples were relevant to us, began to develop our design thinking. 

Later, when the field trial was over, we wrote a report of the project. In addition to describing our process, the design, and the results of our field trial, we discussed the project in terms of conceptual themes we thought might be generalizable to other designs. By abstracting the actual features of the device, using terms such as constraint, control, drift, and openness, we sought to suggest dimensions of design that might be applied broadly. 

However, we could have theorized the Photostroller in any number of different ways. For instance, we could have focused on general statements about reframing Internet data. We might have centered our discussion on the nature of conversational resources. Or on devices that allow smooth transitions between focused and peripheral attention. Or the design of navigational cues for such an interface, or the way we drew on Dieter Rams’s designs in achieving the aesthetic style of the piece, or the health and safety requirements of designing for a care home. Any of these themes could have been abstracted, conceptualized, theorized. Instead, what we highlighted reflected our own views, not only about what was salient for the Photostroller, but also about what is topical and important for research in interaction design. 

So, theory might have been helpful in articulating the qualities of our design that we thought important for its success, and particularly those we would like to see extended in the future. But our theorizing was underdetermined by design—we could have developed any number of theories that would have fit our design. Moreover, our theorizing was, in a sense, political. We did not discuss all aspects of our design and the ways people use it. Instead we focused on those aspects we want to promote in future designs. Our theoretical work didn’t just concern what is, but what ought to be. 

How Can Design Be Research?

In our experience, theory plays an unexpected, indirect, and sometimes rather humble role in design practice. This loose relationship with theory—and often a tighter relationship with other instances of design practice—is not unusual for our work. The question is: Where does this leave design practice as a form of research? According to some common perceptions of what research is all about, the development of consolidated theoretical knowledge is crucial. So, how could design count as research? 

Over the past several years, design-led work has increasingly been accepted as making firstclass contributions to HCI research and practice. Coinciding with a general trend for computing to be applied in all aspects of everyday life, design seems to offer the ability to reflect emotional, aesthetic, cultural, and critical concerns alongside those of functionality and usability. The outcomes offered by design often take the form of prototype products and systems, sometimes developed to a high degree of finish technically, physically, and aesthetically, and sometimes accompanied by accounts of field trials of these products in use or in exhibitions. In addition, “manifestos” occasionally appear, arguing for the value of “supple” or “ludic” or “reflective” design as a direction for future work.

It seems clear that the products and concepts of design can reflect insights and innovations that are topical and valuable to the HCI research community, and that moreover have a character that is often distinct from the systems developed by other disciplines. The methods and methodologies that designers use to come up with these products seem, by implication, to have similar value. But is that enough to make design a form of research, or is it merely fodder to be turned into research by others? Do we need to add some special ingredient—predefined research questions, perhaps, or methodological rigor, or the production of theory—to design practice in order for it to count as research? Or do we have to go further, and change design practices to make our contributions to HCI look a bit more like commonly understood versions of research? In that case, is the result still design, or have we lost something in the process?

These sorts of questions have been vexing the HCI design community—and us—for some time. The problem is that novel products alone do not seem sufficient to count as research, and even a stream of locally innovative designs may not seem to add up to much. But strategies for generalizing beyond practice to produce a body of work recognizable as research seem equally fraught with difficulty. Methodological frameworks promise rigor but jeopardize the possibility for designers to invent ad hoc approaches, or draw inspiration from unorthodox sources, or take inexplicable imaginative leaps—all forms of a productive indiscipline that we see as integral to design practice. Theory promises generality and guidance but seems inadequate to capture the situated, multidimensional, and configurational nature of design, and moreover threatens to occlude the potency of unique, embodied artifacts in a cloud of words and diagrams. Methodologies and theories may well produce respectable research, but the danger is that this will come at the expense of design.

We believe a closer look at endemic design practices might provide a clue about how best to manage the tension between theory and practice in design research. Rather than importing tactics from other disciplines to fashion new normative guidelines, we suggest the answer may be to recognize and build upon practices already in use within the field. This would allow designers to legitimate their activities as research, not by changing their practices to resemble those of other fields, but by more careful articulation of their existing approaches in a way that is legible to those from other disciplines.

In particular, we suggest that annotated portfolios provide a way to present the fruits of design that simultaneously respect the particularity and multidimensionality of design work while meeting many of the demands of generalizable theory. In the rest of this article, we describe the logic behind this notion, illustrate it with an example of an annotated portfolio of our studio’s own work, and describe some of the benefits we see for this strategy of simultaneously illuminating the material and conceptual dimensions of design research.

The Logic of Annotated Portfolios 

A myriad of choices go into the design of any given artifact. These choices are varied, multifaceted, and heterogeneous. They reflect a very wide range of concerns that may include:
functionality of the design (what should it do?) and by implication the value of certain activities (is this worth doing?) 
aesthetics (what form and appearance should the artifact take?) 
practicalities of its production (what materials, skills, and tools are needed to make it?) 
motivation for making (why are we doing this? what are we trying to show?) 
the identities and capabilities the people for whom the artifact is intended (what will our users make of this? how can we best design for them?) 
sociopolitical concerns (what sort of culture will this encourage or resist?).

From this point of view, a designed artifact can be seen as a kind of position statement from its designers, not only about what is important to consider in a given design situation, but also about how to best respond to those considerations.

The trouble with this perspective on artifacts, however, is that neither dimensions of concern nor designers’ orientations to them can be read directly from the artifacts themselves. Any given design can be viewed from an indefinitely large number of perspectives, only a few of which may be salient to the designers themselves. This doesn’t mean that other views are inaccurate or irrelevant, of course—for instance, designers may well be unconscious of a host of cultural, economic, and political assumptions embodied in their designs— but it does render problematic the notion that artifacts embed designers’ research in a way that can be appreciated directly.

Instead, as designers we typically comment on the artifacts we build to highlight the concerns and choices made in their development. This happens routinely both in commercial and research settings. We advertise the new and improved features of a product, for example, or describe how a prototype has relevance for a hot research topic. In both cases, we point out what makes the design new and valuable, rather than leaving the artifact to speak for itself—as if it could.

Given the multifaceted considerations that go into any design, however, it is impossible to describe a given artifact in all its detail, from the political philosophy that informs it to the tactile quality of a given toggle switch. Instead, our written accounts can at best be partial views onto the design as a whole, focusing on some concerns at the expense of others. They are also likely to be incomplete in another respect: Much of our knowledge of making is tacit. As such, it need not appear in written texts because we assume it is shared by members of the community or we will be contacted directly by those seeking clarification.

This means that textual accounts (e.g., published papers, catalog entries, online descriptions) in design research have an indexical character. That is, they point to features of our designs and connect them to matters of further concern, in the case of research, making them topical for discussion within a given community. 

From this point of view, artifacts do not merely demonstrate assertions made more precisely in a theoretical account. On the contrary, we see textual accounts of artifacts, including any theoretical pronouncements about them, as annotations. The textual account achieves its sense and relevance by virtue of its indexical connection with an artifact. At the same time, aspects of that artifact are highlighted and linked to the concerns of a community by the text. Just as a pointing gesture depends on both the finger and the target, and as a caption makes sense of, and exists because of, its associated figure, so artifacts and their descriptions are mutually reliant on their relationship to produce meaning.

This line of reasoning implies that designs need to be annotated if they are to make clear and accountable contributions to research. Such annotations not only point to salient features of an artifact but also bridge between the artifact and issues of concern to the research community. Insofar as such issues include conceptual ones, annotated artifacts can be seen to serve some of the same roles as theoretical statements, identifying activities and qualities deemed important for research and suggesting ways these might be addressed.

Beyond single artifacts, however, annotated portfolios may serve a much more valuable role as an alternative to more formalized theory in conceptual development and practical guidance for design. If a single design occupies a point in design space, a collection of designs by the same or related designers establishes an area in that space. A single artifact embodies propositions about a specific configuration of properties. A comparison of multiple items in a portfolio, on the other hand, can make clear a domain of design, its relevant dimensions, and the designer’s opinion about the fruitful locations and configurations to develop on those dimensions.

Building a Sample Portfolio 

An annotated portfolio, then, is a means for explicating design thinking that retains an intimate indexical connection with artifacts themselves while addressing broader concerns in the research community. To illustrate this notion in more depth, we consider examples from the body of work we have been developing at the Interaction Research Studio over the past 10 years or so. 

Let us start with a single artifact—the Photostroller we described at the beginning of this article. In Figure 1 we label an image of the Photostroller with a number of very brief annotations, annotations that gain their sense from the Photostroller itself and reach out to broader matters of interest in our research communities.

For instance, consider the annotation interaction techniques for the variously abled. Taken by itself, this could refer to any of a huge number of techniques and underlying approaches, from the employment of extra-large controls or augmentation of familiar objects to the provision of specialized feature sets or social networking support. Juxtaposing the annotation with the Photostroller, however, makes clear that the annotation refers to the specific technique being proposed by this research—the particular combination of category selection and specification of “semantic drift” offered by the device’s controller. At the same time, the annotation links this control scheme explicitly to the class of techniques for improving interaction for the variously abled, allowing its contribution to be compared with others. In this way, the annotations build bridges between larger research issues and the approaches to these issues embodied by the Photostroller itself. This linkage does not, however, come through abstracting away from the artifact. Instead, our approach to larger research issues is concretely exemplified in the Photostroller—and with the precision that building a highly finished prototype requires, and thus offers when it is complete.

Now let us add another artifact to this picture, the Prayer Companion (Figure 2). This was developed as a resource for the spiritual activity of a group of cloistered nuns. It displays a stream of information sourced from news feeds and social networking sites to suggest possible topics for prayers. It was developed in the same overall project as the Photostroller, one devoted to exploring technologies for older people. Not surprisingly, the two artifacts share a number of features. The juxtaposition of the two artifacts, however, gives breadth as well as depth to some of those annotations and motivates comparative discussion over others. 

For example, both the Photostroller and the Prayer Companion construe their senior users not as individuals requiring medical care or assistance with living, but as people who are actively curious and engaged with the wider world. Both devices manifest an interesting interplay between constraint and openness in design. On the one hand, they are quite narrow in their interactivity and functionality. The Photostroller “just” shows images and can be influenced with only two controls (category selection and drift control). The Prayer Companion “just” shows scrolling topical text in a manner not controllable by the end users at all. However, this simplicity of functionality leaves a great deal openended. Exactly what people will make of the images or text items is an open affair. Just how the devices will embed within everyday contexts is left for users to determine. Though we anticipated the devices resourcing conversations and other forms of social exchange (including prayer) important to our users, exactly what content these interactions take is not mandated by us.

The Photostroller and the Prayer Companion were both designed to have autonomous “drifting” behaviors. They will continue to stream their content without the intervention of a user. This content will also periodically change as new images or textual items are retrieved from the Internet and added into the pool. In the case of the Photostroller, this process can be influenced through the operation of the wireless controller. While the Prayer Companion varies the content of its display and other features, such as scrolling speed and degree of repetition, to pique visual and intellectual interest, it does this autonomously, without user control. By comparing devices with respect to the annotation, we can begin both to capture the “family resemblances” that exist in the emerging portfolio, and to see how the designs embody a range of different but equally valid (in our studio’s view) responses to the topics indicated by the annotations. 

Let us now add three further artifacts (Figure 3). The Drift Table displays slowly moving aerial photography controlled by the distribution of weight on its surface. The Local Barometer displays online text and images related to the home’s locality, depending on the local wind conditions to give an impression of the sociocultural surroundings. The Plane Tracker tracks aircraft passing overhead and imagines their flights onscreen to resource an understanding of the home’s global links. In different ways, all of these involve the reframing of online content and serve as a kind of threshold between the locality of their use and the wider world. In each case also, the form of the device has been carefully crafted to be mindful of several concerns: the everyday settings in which it is likely to be used, the affordances of the materials and technologies used in construction, culturally significant aesthetic traditions that are drawn upon, and so forth.

It is important to recognize that annotations and the designs they annotate are mutually informing. Annotations have an indexical relationship to the artifacts they are relevant to. Annotations depend on traceable connections to design for their significance, just as designs are illuminated through annotation. For example, the annotation device as threshold to the surrounding world only really gains its sense if one looks at the artifacts in the portfolio it is true of—nearly all of them in one way or another. However, the Drift Table is true to this in a different way from the Prayer Companion, and one needs to appreciate the particularity of those designs to understand the specific sense of the annotation that is relevant. 

Useful annotations, then, tend to have a general application in the portfolio yet a specific sense for individual artifacts within it. Moreover, the sense of an annotation is enriched by reference to example artifacts: It is not just broadened, but given shape and dimensionality by the examples. Individual designs illuminate ways to address the issues raised by annotations and, when accumulated, suggest patterns of similarities and differences in those strategies. They configure a “design space,” a zone of potentially fertile possibilities. 

Let us further elaborate the design space in which these artifacts exist. Figure 4 focuses on users’ experiences with the designs: how users have appropriated the devices in actual use, the senses they have found in them, and the everyday activities in which they are embedded. A key observation we have made a number of times is that our designs resource social interaction. They serve as conversation pieces or curiosities, to be sure, but, more than that, the content they deliver and how they do it typically has a balance of openness and constraint that facilitates interaction between people over matters of interest and concern to them. The Photostroller, for example, enabled the older people for whom it was designed to reminisce, through the images it showed, about their locality and how it had changed in their lifetimes. It also created the opportunity for discussions in which people compared their likings and dislikings of what they were seeing, and, broadly speaking, their appreciation for photography itself.

We have observed our devices being used in a variety of ways, many of which combine playfulness and provisional tasks. For example, we designed the Drift Table to support a kind of curiosity-driven play, rather than particular functions better served by more goal-directed tools and interaction techniques. However, our design does not prohibit people from setting provisional tasks for themselves, in which a more concrete aim is locally formulated, for example (to cite an example we observed), using the Drift Table to travel to Bournemouth to look from above at the homes of the rich. Accordingly, we annotate Figure 4 to highlight this mixture of play and situated task-orientation that we commonly observe in how our devices are encountered in practice. 

Features of Annotated Portfolios

Clearly, the annotations of our portfolio shown in the figures here are extremely succinct, even when considered along with our elaborations in the body of the article. For some purposes, such brevity might be appropriate, while for others (including presentation to a typical academic community), we might well expand each annotation significantly. Nonetheless, even this brief illustration enables us to draw out some characteristic features of annotated portfolios: 
Annotations make a collection of designed artifacts into a portfolio. They bring together individual artifacts as a systematic body of work. 
Annotations capture family resemblances between designs in a mesh of similarities and differences. 
Typically a portfolio can be annotated in several different ways, reflecting different purposes and interests and with different audiences in mind. 
Annotations and the designs they annotate are mutually informing. Artifacts are illuminated by annotations. Annotations are illustrated by artifacts.

We believe that assembling a body of work into an annotated portfolio can have a number of benefits. First, it can give an accessible account of the design style of a particular project, studio, or institution. We feel the annotations we have given don’t merely structure the presentation of the devices but go some way to uncovering their underlying aesthetic and sociopolitical values. As such, annotated portfolios enable us to compare the work of different projects, studios, or institutions. For example, the portfolio of another group might reveal a tendency to illuminate socio-political issues by eliciting ambivalent reactions to seductively dystopian scenarios. This might be contrasted with our work, which, we believe, avoids both dystopian and celebratory reactions to prevailing trends in favor of providing alternatives grounded in people’s specific experiences and identities.

Annotating a portfolio of work can also help us bring out features that may not have been covered in the individual papers that publish accounts, typically, of single artifacts. This can facilitate assessing the value of the scientific and aesthetic contribution of a body of work. For example, the style of design we have analyzed above has a clear identity and one different from orientations to HCI such as software agents, direct manipulation, ambient computing, emotional computing, and other tendencies. To add to our list of characteristic features of annotated portfolios: 
Annotations communicate the nature of the portfolio and enable its comparison with others. 
Annotations can shape how artifacts are appreciated and understood, and what scientific and aesthetic value they might have, as well as suggest future research and design possibilities. 

Finally, in annotating our studio’s work here, we have used a mixture of text and images appropriate for a magazine article. Elsewhere we have presented the notion, and our work, in academic papers. A set of annotated photographs edited into a monograph with an introductory essay might situate the portfolio more appropriately for some design audiences. However, it should not be thought that written texts with illustrations are the only way to present an annotated portfolio. Much depends on the audience that one is trying to reach. Many exhibitions—including those drawing together work that might otherwise be seen as unrelated—can be seen as a kind of annotated portfolio. Annotated portfolios might take the form of videos, or a stage show, or a collection of postcards. Thus, any material form and format can be considered for an annotated portfolio, including an illustrated monograph, a scientific paper, a curated exhibition, and so forth.

Design and Theory 

We propose the notion of annotated portfolios as a way to communicate design research. In part, we do this to provide an alternative to accounts that suggest for design to become productive as research, it should engage in some sort of theory formation. While what exactly is meant by theory is not always clear, writers usually have in mind some conceptual machinery that can explain and predict. Experiments test theories. While we do not dispute that sometimes a designed artifact and the experience of its use can have an experimental status, we do not believe this is typically the case in the kind of design research we do in HCI. Accordingly, it is moot whether we want to regard annotated portfolios as a contribution to design theory in HCI, if by theory is meant something with explanatory and predictive power. Rather than explain existing devices (and this already seems like an odd formulation), we seek to describe them in a way that has an indexical, mutually informing relationship to the devices themselves. Rather than predict the future, we seek to inspire novel work and offer a mapping of the dimensions of emerging design spaces in which it might be situated.

Any particular set of annotations is perspectival, allowing other annotations to be made. Annotations allow family resemblances to be reasoned about, rather than theoretical deductions to be made. Annotations help us understand what has made a body of work characterful. This may help us understand its successes and failings and inspire future work, but the logic seems to us rather different from that governing theory construction and hypothesis testing, at least as those processes are typically described by writers who call for more rigor in design research or for theoretical or methodological integration with more traditional approaches.

Nonetheless, annotated portfolios may well do some of the work that “theory” is often invoked to do, including addressing the criteria of rigor and relevance. One does not necessarily need the concepts of an overarching theory to be able to describe the world with clarity and rigor, nor is a (explanatory, predictive) theory necessarily required to make one’s work relevant to the concerns of users or researchers or anyone else. Similarly, it should not be thought that being loyal to the particularities of artifacts necessarily means we have to make enemies of generality. Annotated portfolios are, perhaps, a way of modestly and speculatively reaching out beyond the particular without losing grounding—and doing this with all the rigor and relevance needed to inform the invention and detailed development of new designs. 

Part of our enthusiasm for proposing annotated portfolios as an approach to communicating design research lies in the fact that they are not a big step from what designers do anyway. It is common practice for designers (and artists, for that matter) to gather their work into a portfolio and highlight important features that run through it. The presentation of a portfolio will often point to family relationships: “In this piece, I sought to develop the idea from that piece but in a different way.” Or, “These five pieces are all explorations of similar concerns.” And so forth. We feel reasoning about portfolios is a practice that is indigenous to design and, accordingly, many designers in HCI will feel more comfortable working up annotated portfolios than having to integrate their work with theoretical constructs that may not have had a clear role in motivating what they do. 

Equally, we are happy to be offering an approach that is open to interpretation and appropriation, in keeping with our own design work. Annotated portfolios do not propose a format of presentation or a set of concerns to be addressed. They do not mandate a particular graphical style, or prescribe a series of categories to be employed, or advocate an elaborate ontology of entities and relationships. The notion does demand that particular designs be linked to others by way of issues of relevance to the research community, but what those issues are or how they should be expressed is not our concern. In some sense, what we are offering here is a methodology for communicating design research, but not a restricted toolkit of methods.

We believe design research has a characterful contribution to make to HCI that may be watered down if excessively “scientistic” criteria for the validity of research are laid at its door. To be sure, ongoing work is needed to maintain and improve the quality of research undertaken through design. Equally, we need to simultaneously bridge to other disciplines while drawing them in to appreciate how design works. Rather than doing this by mutating design to become more like “real” research, however, we believe it is better to grow design’s identity as research from its existing practices and reasoning. Our hope is that annotated portfolios will be one step along that path.

ALTERNATIVES: EXPLORING INFORMATION APPLIANCES THROUGH CONCEPTUAL DESIGN PROCESSES

ABSTRACT 

As a way of mapping a design space for a project on information appliances, we produced a workbook describing about twenty conceptual design proposals. On the one hand, they serve as suggestions that digital devices might embody values apart from those traditionally associated with functionality and usefulness. On the other, they are examples of research through design, balancing concreteness with openness to spur the imagination, and using multiplicity to allow the emergence of a new design space. Here we describe them both in terms of content and process, discussing first the values they address and then how they were crafted to encourage a broad discussion with our partners that could inform future stages of design. 

Keywords: design research, information appliances, home, conceptual design 

INTRODUCTION 

As digital technologies migrate into our everyday lives, we expect their forms, functions, and values to expand beyond those embodied by the desktop PC. Recently we have joined in the formation of the Information Appliance Studio, a virtual organisation headed by the newly created Appliance Studio Ltd. which spans Hewlett-Packard, IDEO Product Development, and the Computer Related Design department at the Royal College of Art, to explore and shape new possibilities for everyday technologies. 

Information appliances, as described for instance by Norman [7], are devices that perform a single function (or closely related cluster of functions) with simplicity and elegance. Networking, often assumed to be wireless, allows new synergies to form among them, recreating the complex possibilities of traditional computing while offering new affordances for interaction. Because specialised appliances can take a wide variety of forms, their benefits can be fluidly integrated in peoples' everyday lives, without requiring that they withdraw to a desktop computer. 

The notion of information appliances is inspiring but fuzzy, defined by a combination of abstract vision, technological infrastructure, and only occasional exemplars. For instance, the Hewlett Packard CapShare, a handheld scanner that allows images to be captured by passing the device over a page and wirelessly transmitted to a PC or printer, is a good example of an information appliance. The Palm Pilot, on the other hand, is usually held to perform too many functions to qualify. Other possibilities that have been suggested as "good" information appliances include digital cameras, cookbooks, or gardening appliances. So far, however, the field has been defined largely at a conceptual level, with the space of devices that might populate it little defined either analytically or by example. 

In order to better understand the range of information appliances that might evolve, we developed a large number of conceptual design proposals which we presented in a workbook produced for our partners. These speculations were intended to open a conversation with the group about the values that might characterise everyday technologies-- values seldom reflected in existing products. 

The goal of this paper is to describe the Alternatives workbook both in terms of the proposals it made for future information appliances and as a method for pursuing design. First, almost half the paper is devoted to the presentation of reduced versions of the workbook pages, slightly modified to retain legibility, as a way of simulating their impact directly. Second, we discuss the ideas in terms of the cultural values they suggest for technologies meant to be integrated in everyday life. Finally, we describe the proposals as an example of research through design, describing how they were designed to balance concreteness, openness and multiplicity to allow the emergence of a design space that could be developed with our partners. 

ALTERNATIVE VALUES 

Suggestions for how digital technologies might be employed in everyday settings tend to represent a narrow range of cultural possibilities, reinforcing a simple dichotomy between work and play. Many devices import values from the workplace into the home, emphasising the requirements of "domestic work" by allowing chores to be done more efficiently or productively. Others emphasise the desirability of taking "time off," allowing people to play unproductive games or access new forms of broadcast media. Other values seem rarely to be addressed at all. 

One exception to this generalisation is in telecommunications, which has long been appropriated for domestic use. More recently, products have explored the potential for supporting emotional communication, often without explicit messages. For instance, the Lovegety [4] signals romantic availability to nearby users via lights and sounds when their simple profiles match. While this may seem a crude reflection of the subtleties of everyday courting behaviour, more sophisticated forms of emotional communication are starting to be explored by research groups [e.g., 1, 9, 11]. Still in early forms of development, their explorations of sensual aesthetics and implicit expression, coupled with the value they place on emotional connections, suggest new roles for technologies in our personal lives. 

While emotional interfaces have been increasingly recognised as a meaningful alternative to more traditional perspectives on functionality, there are many other examples of noninstrumental values that technologies might support. The speculative design examples presented in the Alternatives workbook are intended to greatly expand the ways that people find meaning in and through technology. 

In presenting these proposals we are deliberately noncommitai about the exact technologies that might be used in their implementation. As Fiona Raby has noted [personal communication], in the technology industry a prototype "works" when the technology has been implemented, even if aesthetic and cultural issues are neglected. In design the opposite is true: A prototype "works" when it successfully captures the experience of using a given device, even if implementation issues are not fully resolved. At the same time, we see little value in "science fiction" concepts which rely on technological effects that can or do not exist. Instead, the proposals are intended to be technologically plausible, in the sense that it seems likely that they can be realised even if the exact means are unknown or unspecified. In practice, achieving plausibility depends on designers' knowledge and judgement, while an evaluation of the results may depend on discussions with technical experts. 

While maintaining technical plausibility, however, we do propose several systems that. seem socially implausible. Proposals such as the Dawn Chorus (figure 2) and Democratic Advertising (Figure 4) may be seen as examples of what Tony Dunne calls value fictions [3]. Unlike science fiction, in which implausible technologies are invented to support recognisable cultural activities, value fictions propose practical technologies for implausible social goals. They can be valuable as criticisms of culture and technology--in the case of Democratic Advertising, pointing out the overwhelming degree to which public spaces are controlled by commercial and governmental interests; while the Dawn Chorus might be seen as a comment on our desire to tame nature. 

In the following, we discuss some of the values our designs are meant to encourage. Analysed post hoc, this may be a somewhat incomplete list: As we discuss later, the best embodiment of the values we have been exploring are the proposals themselves. 

Impressionistic Displays 

One of the values the proposals speak to is people's desire for attention to and variety in the aesthetics of devices they use in their daily lives. Many of the proposed designs seek to move away from the precise symbolic displays often associated with computers and provide impressionistic, ambient information more normally provided by analogue devices. For instance, the Datalamp (Figure l) allows images to spill out of the device into its surrounds--perhaps onto a screen, but equally possibly onto a corner of the room, the ceiling, or a piece of furniture. The soft aesthetics of displays such as this seem well-suited for domestic environments. Perhaps less demanding than displays providing more precise information, they also permit a degree of ambiguity that might encourage imagination and speculation. 

In encouraging the use of these sorts of aesthetics, we join researchers such as Weiser [12], Ishii [see 1], and Philips Corporate Design [9] in embracing a softer approach to technologies designed for home environments. For such an aesthetics to be effective, however, the mapping between information and display must be functionally appropriate. It is no use using an imprecise display to convey information that people might want or need to inspect closely. Equally, the mapping must be appropriate emotionally. Using display techniques which evoke a calm and reflective experience may seem slightly ridiculous when linked, for instance, with urgent or detailed technical data. While an artist-designer approach may introduce a wide range of new aesthetics to technologies, the underlying skill lies in crafting these aesthetics with respect to the functions and cultural roles they are meant to support. 

A crafted aesthetics is often the most obvious feature of the design approach to technology, but for many designers this is only a surface feature of a process primarily concemed with the conceptual design of devices meant to fit everyday life. This involves shaping the functionality and cultural roles of technology in conjunction with their physical form [see also 13]. Shaping the appearance of devices was not enough; they also had to be designed to provide functions meaningful in those parts of life that are not dominated by productive work or unproductive entertainment. This was the primary focus of the work reported here. 

Diversions 

A conceptual analog to the value of impressionistic displays is the value people find in being diverted from their normal patterns of perceiving and behaving in the world. Rather than pursuing clear and precise goals, we often f'md enjoyment and meaning in experiencing the world in novel or surprising ways. 

The (De)Tour Guide proposal (figure 3) expresses this value clearly. The device would use location and direction information to play audio and tactile cues to travellers in the city. In moving away from the kind of omniscient overview provided by maps, the (De)Tour Guide would allow districts and landmarks to be discovered only upon approach, as if by chance. Beyond this, however, people might sometimes use the device to get lost on purpose, or to follow the idiosyncratic paths of unusual strangers. In providing for these sorts of possibilities, the device gives technological support for Situationist detourn6s [8], wanders through the city's emotional and cultural topology. 

Other concepts, too, explore the notion of diversions in everyday life. For example, several of our proposals concerned psychological exploration, using alterations of normal perception as a way of evoking insight. The Gestalt Camera (figure 10), for instance, would manipulate images of the users' surroundings to produce ambiguous stimuli upon which viewers might project meaning. In producing new, accidental patterns, it is hoped, the device would stimulate novel interpretations of the viewer's relationship with the surrounding social and physical environment. 

Using technology to surprise or distract runs contrary to the usual efforts to increase efficiency and productivity through predictability and control. Yet there are values to be gained from diversion such as the chance to discover new places, people, or ways of looking at the world. Such benefits are recognised implicitly within the CSCW field, where support for "peripheral awareness" of colleagues, without explicit purpose or function, is advocated as leading to opportunities for serendipitous communication and a general increase in the coherence of work groups [e.g., Kraut, 6]. Supporting such accidental encounters--with other places or perceptions, as well as people----can thus be seen as a sort of "serious play" fitting between the usual categories of work and time off. 

Influence 

People seek influence over their environments, and digital technology have traditionally extended possibilities to extend knowledge and control. Two of our proposals emphasise this value as well, but in new domains and surprising ways. 

First, the Dawn Chorus (figure 2) offers the possibility that people might control the songs sung by local birds. Although this may seem far-fetched, with the use of a pitch detector and simple machine intelligence it seems plausible that an automatic behavioural paradigm could be arranged to shape birds' behaviour as their songs increasingly approximate a target tune. Individual bird recognition, moreover, could allow the different birds to be trained to take different harmonic roles in an overall composition. 

The Dawn Chorus speaks to the value people find in appreciating-and domesticating--nature. Just as the burgeoning garden industry has allowed people to extend control from their living rooms to their gardens [10], so the Dawn Chorus would extend this control to the very wildlife that shares domestic neighbourhoods. 

Of course, the control offered by the Dawn Chorus is not unproblematic. Apart from the problem ofneighbours having incompatible musical tastes, interfering with bird's natural songs might adversely affect their mating behaviour. Perhaps it is fortunate that not all songbirds are susceptible to training. Nonetheless, the proposal often seems to delight people, at least conceptually, because of the surprising influence it offers. 

In another sphere, Democratic Advertising (figure 6) would allow people to copy advertisements between various sites using portable capture devices. By spreading advertisements that they found beautiful, useful, or socially important, people could influence elements of the public sphere which are normally beyond their reach• Advertisers, in turn, would find advantages if their advertisements spread for no extra cost, and direct feedback if they failed. 

Intimacy 

People also find meaning in nonverbal, inexplicit forms of communication that few technologies support well. Whereas emotional communication systems described earlier in this paper have often sought to make the qualities of the medium itself mimic or reflect those of intimacy-- using softness, tactility, and so on--the proposals here use constraints on the media to suggest or encourage intimate forms of communication. 

The Intimate View, for instance, proposes that sharing extremely constrained images of magnified details might allow lovers to create moments of mutual focus. Intimate View is deliberately open about the kinds of images that might be shared, so that partners might share erotic explorations as easily as mundane details of their surroundings. 

The Dream Communicator encourages an even more .intimate form of communication. Building on the idea that people incorporate external stimuli into their dreams, and the situation in which people in different time zones are awake when their partners are asleep, the device monitors the sleeper and signals the u~er when their partner enters REM sleep. At this point, the traveller may seek to influence his or her partner's dreams, transmitting sounds, or perhaps tactile stimuli, lights, or scents. 

Proposals like the Dream Communicator may raise questions about the degree to which people will accept technological mediation or support of their intimacy• However, it may not be the technology per se that is at issue, but the degree of intimacy it implies: allowing one's dreams to be influenced by somebody else would seem to require an extraordinary amount of trust, and desire for togetherness. 

Insight 

Many people desire to understand and change their experience of their selves and the world around them. When reflected by phenomena such as the sales of self-help books or new age materials, such values are clearly widespread, yet can be easy to dismiss. Nonetheless, designs might reflect them in ways that can be meaningful without being solemn, externalising psychological mechanisms into digital technologies either to escape or encourage them. 

For instance, the Worry Stone (figure 7) is basically an electronic to-do list that uses its processing power to endlessly and visibly rehearse entries. By taking on the fretting of the user, the intention is that it should free time for less neurotic activities. This proposal may be seen as a comment on peoples' behaviour, but also as an appropriate use of digital technologies to perform tasks that are onerous or difficult for humans. 

The Gestalt Camera would allow people to capture and manipulate images of the environment around them. This might be done merely for entertainment. But the forms of manipulations possible would be guided by the projective tests of psychoanalysis such as Rorschach inkblots. The interpretations people make of these ambiguous stimuli can give insights into their preoccupations or desires; using the Gestalt Camera, then, might similarly provide a pleasurable foundation for people to reflect on their attitudes towards their current situation. Related to this, the Daydreamer would present pictures to users and prompt them to write short interpretive phrases. Using both the image and the phrase, the system would search for a new picture in an internal database or over the internet. A chain of images and words would emerge, providing support for and a record of an extended revery. 

These proposals, and others like them, suggest that technology might work with the tendency for people to structure their worlds meaningfully. On the one hand, they might lead users to reflect on the ways they interpret the world. But even used reflectively, such devices might help relieve stress (e.g., the Worry Stone) or provide new forms of meaningful play (e.g., the Gestalt Camera). 

Mystery 

People can find value and solace in contemplating the unknown. Just as technologies tend to overlook peoples' interest in the psyche, so do they neglect their enthusiasm for speculations about spirituality, extraterrestrial life, and parapsychology. Without committing ourselves to belief or disbelief, we developed several proposals to explore these issues. 

For instance, the Prayer Device would simply transmit a speakers voice to a tightly focused beam of energy--perhaps radio waves--to be transmitted into the heavens. Perhaps installed in public spaces like a new kind of telephone booth, the device would allow people to send their thoughts or supplications to whomever or whatever they thought might listen. No provision is made for any kind of feedback, or for devices allowing others to listen in. However, it might be imagined that some proportion of transmissions would be heard accidently via radios, TV's, or even telephones. This would allow people to overhear and perhaps gain appreciation for their fellow humans' deepest concerns. 

Other proposals explored paranormal phenomena, suggesting, for instance, the creation of a Psy Exerciser that would allow people to work through game-like exercises to increase their paranormal powers. A culmination of this line of thought is the Telegotchi, which is similar to the popular children's toy but without any controls. 

These proposals do not depend on a belief in numinous phenomena to be meaningful. Instead, like many of the proposals aimed at exploring psychological phenomena, they depend on peoples' tendency to project meaning onto ambiguous stimuli such as chance events. Although the devices may suggest spiritual or paranormal interpretations, they require merely an open mind and a willingness to experiment. 

A BOOK OF SHORT STORIES 

The proposals presented in the Alternatives workbook were developed over a period of two to three months working part-time. They were informed by research into information appliances in particular, and new electronic products in general. But they were also inspired by other eclectic influences-stories in the popular press, past experiences, and other projects from design and the conceptual arts. Most of all, they were the products of a kind of daydreaming, in which we imagined the devices that might be found in our own and other peoples' everyday lives. This process--left implicit and undervalued by the sciences--is a fundamental part of our design practice. 

We designed the workbook to encourage a similar process of imagination in our partners. Presented as fictional products, they encourage people to imagine living with them, raising many of the sorts of reactions that might be encountered if they actually existed. This encourages both a more integrative and a more emotional approach than might be encouraged by formal analyses, and one marked by imaginative engagement, so that the proposals act as tools for brainstorming new ideas. In this way, the proposals acted as probes into the values and beliefs of our design partners, eliciting a conversation about the directions we might take in pursuing information appliances. 

In order to spark conversations without overly constraining them, the proposals were presented with attention to several factors. Individually, the proposals required a balance between concreteness and openness: they needed to be specific enough to evoke intuitive reactions, yet indefinite enough to encourage imaginative extensions. In addition, the group of proposals was numerous enough to avoid undue focus on any single one of them, allowing a design space to be an emergent outcome of the process. In the following sections, we discuss these issues in more detail. 

Concreteness: (Fictional) Artifact as Theory Nexus 

Synthesising ideas in the form of design proposals is an efficient and effective way to promote discussion of a wide range of design issues. As Carroll and Kellogg [2] have pointed out, the design of an artifact involves commitment to stances on many potentially articulable theoretical issues, and these commitments may be--often are-- implicit. This is no less true for imaginary artifacts than for realised ones. Beyond serving as suggestions for development, then, design proposals can also be seen as complex hypothetical statements for debate. 

While Carroll and Kellogg's analysis focused on cognitive aspects of artifacts' usability, their insight is more generally applicable to questions of technology, aesthetics, and (most importantly here) the psychological, social, and cultural effects that systems might make. Some of these issues are difficult to articulate and seldom discussed in the HCI community. This makes design proposals particularly valuable: insofar as they address such issues at all, even if implicitly, they provide a ground for discussing them, whether explicitly or through intuitive reactions ("that looks too nostalgic"). 

In addition, artifacts--imaginary or real--take on a reality apart from their creators. On the one hand, they can serve as a representative of a theoretical stance without implying the commitment of the designer. On the other hand, they do not enforce a single theoretical framework, but allow multiple perspectives. This again makes proposals a valuable basis for communication among disparate partners. 

The intuitive approach we took to developing and presenting our ideas does not preclude a more analytic perspective. The dimensions and decisions implicit in the proposals can be identified via a post-hoc analysis, as we have done to some degree in the first part of this paper. As a tool for promoting discussion, however, it seems more useful to leave such aspects unarticulated. This may help avoid premature and distracting discussions of abstractions, and allow different participants to develop their own views about the issues involved. In addition, it may be more efficient to work directly on the synthesis of issues in artifacts rather than via a mediating layer of abstraction and articulation. 

Openness: Proposals as Prototypes 

Presenting ideas as narrative proposals allows their concreteness to be balanced with openness, because many details of their implementation, aesthetics, or functionality do not need to be resolved. This allows them to remain open to imaginary extensions, developments, and modifications in a way that would be difficult to achieve with more finished examples. 

Balancing concreteness with openness depended crucially on the presentation of our ideas in the Alternatives workbook. Each of the proposals relied on images and text to suggest how the idea might be developed. Both were meant to be suggestive but clearly uncommitted as to details of form, function, or technological implementation. We sought to develop a narrative feel to the proposals, similar to commercial advertisements or science fiction stories which describe enough to imagine a device without necessarily specifying either its form or underlying mechanisms. 

A variety of imagery was used to convey the basic concepts. Many used collages of disparate elements to suggest facets of the designs' forms, aesthetics, or potential technologies. Using juxtapositions of found elements allowed us to evoke new relationships of aesthetics and function. For instance, the collage for the Dawn Chorus (figure 2), an intelligent feeder that teaches local birds to sing favourite songs, combines images of a birdhouse to indicate the product genre, a strawberry suggesting the desirability of the birds' rewards, and an antennae pointing to the electronic nature of the product. None of these elements are to be taken literally, of course. Nonetheless, the combination of elements is effective in suggesting both the kind of artifact being proposed as well as its playful and somewhat surreal nature. We also used simple diagrams to illustrate some of our ideas, as well as found imagery conveying the context of the proposal. This range of collages, diagrams, and found imagery allowed us to suggest aspects of our design concepts without prematurely committing ourselves to details. 

The writing was styled to support the impressionistic feel of the images. Most of the texts briefly set a context for the ideas and then described the concept with pointers towards possible technologies and forms. But the voice used in doing this is meant to seem slightly estranged. In this we were inspired, in part, by Kabakov's [5] "Palace of Projects," a book describing a series of installations in which many are purported to be written by fictional authors--teachers, chauffeurs, pensioners, and the like--to emphasise the ordinary if seldom articulated values they address. Without going so far as to attribute the concepts to fictional characters, we did try to write the descriptions as if borrowing the voices of people with value systems and technological knowledge slightly less cynical than our own. 

The text and images were mutually dependant in communicating the proposals. The text set the scene and described the functions and roles of the proposed artifacts, while the images suggested their aesthetic and cultural feel in a more intuitive way, opening a space for imagination to fill in details or extend the concepts beyond what was written. The surreality of collages, writing style, and value fictions all contributed to the openness of individual proposals. Moreover, the range of proposals, from practical to poetic, contributed to their openness as a group of ideas. 

THE ROLE OF SPECULATIVE DESIGN: PLACEHOLDERS AS LANDMARKS 

While we believe that even the most speculative of these proposals has merit, their overriding function was to serve as landmarks opening a space of design possibilities for future information appliances. As such, the concepts are placeholders, occupying points in the design space without necessarily being the best devices to populate it. 

The sheer number of proposals encouraged them to be treated as a group defining a broad territory, rather than as a number of proposals to be evaluated separately. While individual ideas might be taken forward, the existence of many alternatives discouraged too much weight being placed on any single idea. Though some might stand out more than others, all contributed to a rough sense of a larger domain. 

The design proposals are primarily intended to explore a number of positions on issues concerning future technologies. This might have been done by addressing the space more analytically, perhaps trying to identify its important dimensions before creating examples within the space. Instead, we followed our intuitions and interests in developing the proposals, and allowed the space to emerge from the territories they covered. While the space thus defined is necessarily biased by our desires and interests, this approach has strengths in allowing the discovery of new areas and dimensions as unarticulated interests guide the introduction of new ideas. 

Proposals such as these might also form the basis for new kinds of user studies. Aimed at a middle ground between research into peoples' general lifestyles, and studies more focused on their reactions to product concepts, concept proposals could introduce speculative new ideas to potential users in such a way as to evoke general insights into their attitudes as well as more specific reactions. Perhaps most promising, by inherently acknowledging seemingly unusual values, the proposals might encourage people to admit to pleasures and desires that the high technology industry often seems to dismiss as unworthy or nonexistent. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We are grateful to our partners from Hewlett Packard, IDEO Product Design, and Appliance Design Inc. for their collaboration on this project, and in particular Colin Bums, Ray Crispin, David Frolich, Bill Sharpc, and Phil Stenton. In addition, we thank Tony Dunne, Fiona Raby, and Anne Schlottmann for valuable conversations about these ideas. 


PROVOCATIVE AWARENESS

Abstract. Recently a number of systems have been designed that connect remote lovers, or strangers in an urban setting. The forms these systems take and the functions they serve may be unfamiliar, but they can be seen as extensions of awareness technologies to new domains. Awareness technologies have often been specialised to give information for particular work activities or relationships. Given that relationships in the home or in local communities tend to be different from those of the workplace, it is appropriate that both the form and content of information conveyed to increase awareness should be different as well. The systems described here, for instance, explore new sensory and interaction possibilities, use ambiguity to increase engagement, and address a wider range of emotional relationships than do most workplace awareness systems. They point to ways of extending notions of peripheral awareness to new domains on the one hand, and possibilities for new forms of workplace awareness on the other.

Key words: awareness, design, emotions, everyday life

Introduction 

The Bench Object, designed by Fiona Raby (Dunne and Raby, 1995) is intended to be found in a public space. Equipped with sensors and heaters, the seat warms when somebody sits on a partner bench (Figure 1). The effect is a visceral feeling of intimacy with the other person, potentially as uncomfortable as sitting on a recently vacated seat. The Bench Object provides peripheral awareness of other people, but in a form that is unfamiliar and disturbing. Its effects rely on two features: First, in using warmth to indicate the presence of another person, the bench conveys a direct sense of their corporeality. Second, its situation in a public space implies intimacy with strangers, challenging assumptions of public inaccessibility to which urban dwellers are accustomed. 

Designs like the Bench open up notions of the perceptual senses that might be used in conveying peripheral awareness, and illustrate possibilities for technology-mediated awareness to be quite direct. Such designs also point to new possibilities for the functions and experiences awareness systems might serve, suggesting forms of telecommunications that might fit domestic or public spaces rather than the workplace. Despite being unusual, designs like the Bench Object have continuity with and can be seen as extensions of more traditional systems for supporting awareness.

FOCUSING PERIPHERAL AWARENESS 

Notions of peripheral awareness as a resource for shared work grew to a great degree from experiences with video mediated communication. Mediaspaces – computer controlled networks of audio and video linking offices and public space – were intended to short-circuit physical distances, allowing some of the benefits of co-location or proximity in terms of the ease of coordinating activities or entering into serendipitous communication (Bly et al., 1993; Root, 1988; Stults, 1986). These benefits include not only the ability to engage in focused, task-oriented conversations, but also and crucially on a more general orientation to the presence and activities of colleagues. 

Peripheral awareness, as embodied by mediaspaces, seemed to depend on rich, unfiltered information conveyed through images or sounds. After all, awareness is ‘peripheral’ insofar as it concerns activities that are not foreground tasks, so it would seem that information meant to support it should be relatively openended in order to maximise the chances that it will be good for some as-yet undetermined collaborative activity. In addition, it makes sense to avoid text and concentrate on visual or auditory presentation to avoid task interference, particularly in office environments where much work involves speaking, reading, or writing. From this point of view, video appeared to provide a good basis for general awareness, allowing people to appropriate what they need as resources for their current activities. 

Assumptions that information for peripheral awareness should be unselective and avoid speech or text, however, may have been misleading. To begin with, it is not the case that video itself is unselective. Ethnographic studies of collaboration in established working environments (e.g., Heath and Luff, 1991) argued that thef raming of video, and in particular the emphasis on head and shoulders views, cuts out gestures and artefacts that may be crucial for coordinating work. This led to attempts to modify video views (e.g. Gaver et al., 1993), but overcoming video’s essential limitations – including those related to privacy – is difficult. Thus other awareness systems turned towards greater mediation of information, using electronic systems ranging from door icons, to multiple cursors in shared drawing spaces, to animated avatars in virtual environments. Such techniques remain in the family of peripheral awareness systems in that the information they convey concerns the context of activity, but they involve a significant narrowing and design of information offered for awareness. 

The increasing development of systems providing focused information for awareness does not negate the hypothesis that peripheral awareness may best be served by rich, unselective information. Rather, such systems reflect the fact that all technologies are constrained in terms of the information they can convey. Using more sophisticated understandings of how people actually coordinate everyday work allows systems to be developed that make a virtue of technological constraints, by working within them to provide the information necessary for certain forms of shared activities. Such systems make hypotheses, implicitly or explicitly, about the information that is and is not useful for people to coordinate work, and thus emphasise some experiences over others. In focusing on the support of relatively well understood aspects of shared work, however, we may question whether such systems have abandoned the potential to provide more subtle and open forms of shared experience that early mediaspaces allowed.

AWARENESS AT HOME OR ON THE STREET 

Current systems designed to support peripheral awareness have grown with business environments in mind. Because of this, they tend to embody assumptions about the underlying goals of providing awareness, the information that might be useful, and the media by which they might be conveyed. As collaborative technologies move out of the office and into the home or local community, new goals emerge, and thus new requirements for information and media. At home technologies could support emotional connections, providing access to other peoples’ moods or attitudes, not simply their presence or availability. Within the community, technologies might help bridge different social groups, values and attitudes, to potentially mediate the communication of varied subcultures. These new functions for awareness technologies imply new forms and new means of conveying information. 

In the following sections, I describe a number of systems that have been designed to support communication in the home or in the community. The systems described here fall into two complementary groups. First are systems intended to provide emotional connections among people who are distant from one another but would like to feel closer. The second are systems for community settings, intended to create contact among people who are physically close to one another, but emotionally and culturally distant. 

This work comes from a design tradition, rather than the science and engineering approaches underlying most research on human computer interaction and computer supported collaborative work. There are several distinctive features of work from this tradition. First, most of these projects take the form of design proposals rather than implemented systems. This springs from a focus on the systems’ aesthetics and cultural implications rather than the technologies used to implement them. Second, they are ‘tested’ informally in studio or gallery settings or via descriptions and scenarios (c.f. Martin and Gaver, 2000). This reflects a stress on the evocative potential of design concepts, their ability to provoke understanding and imagination, and implies a form of evaluation centred on the richness of insights and inspiration they may offer (see also Dunne and Gaver, 1997). 

From this point of view, the design concepts I discuss here should not be taken as implemented systems so much as instantiated arguments about the forms that awareness technologies might take. My purpose is to bring these arguments to a new audience, to suggest ways that notions of peripheral awareness traditionally discussed in the computer supported collaborative work community might be expanded in form and in function. Several themes run through this work. First, in exploring a wide range of forms and media, the designs presented here suggest that awareness technologies might explore a wider range of sensory and aesthetic possibilities. Second, in conveying information imprecisely, they suggest that hints or clues about other people’s activities may be as effective, and more emotionally satisfying, than more complete information in evoking experiences of connection. Finally, in addressing a variety of relationships, they suggest that awareness technologies might reflect and support a wider range of activities and situations supported by peripheral awareness than they do now.

Intimate connections 

Separated lovers may employ letters, the telephone, and even email to maintain their relationships, but it often seems difficult to use symbolic media in creating a shared emotional experience. A variety of proposals have emerged recently for systems that use less precise, non-linguistic displays to evoke or communicate emotions. Most are concerned with creating emotional connections between lovers when they are apart, though some focus on less intimate friendships. 

FEATHER, SCENT, AND SHAKER 

In an early exploration of emotional communication, Rob Strong developed a number of experimental systems for supporting emotional relations while a student at the Royal College of Art (Strong and Gaver, 1996). The Feather, for example, describes a scenario in which a travelling partner would carry a small picture frame showing perhaps a romantic photograph of the couple. Picking up the frame closes an electrical circuit as a low current flows through the user’s body itself, causing the device to make a connection to a linked device placed in the home. This is a small wooden cabinet mounted on long legs, with a clear plexiglas cone extending above it. When the connection is made from the picture device, a small fan mounted in the cabinet activates, wafting a small white feather to float around within the cone (Figure 2). The drifting feather becomes a poetic metaphor for the thought of the absent lover.

The Scent device is similar to the Feather, but the receiving device consists of a large bowl with a heating element that warms a smaller container of essential oil, causing scent to permeate the local environment (Figure 3). The use of smell is evocative and intimate by its nature, and in addition allows the signal to be customised, perhaps by the use of the couple’s favourite perfume. Even after the connection is broken, the scent lingers, like the memory of a recent encounter.

Shakers, finally, are aimed at less intimate, more playful relations among friends. Pairs of devices are linked, with each containing a solenoid and transmitter/ receiver device (Figure 4). Shaking one simply causes the other to shake in an analogous fashion, allowing people to communicate in a direct language of gentle or forceful movements. Similar devices have since been proposed both by Hiroshi Ishii’s group at the MIT media lab (Brave and Dahley, 1997) and by students at Stanford University (Fogg et al., 1998). The notion behind all of these designs is that in allowing a variation of tactile communications, more or less explicit languages and games might evolve.

Strong’s designs demonstrated the possibility that emotional relationships might be mediated using perceptible indications of connections. Although never tested with real lovers, both the proposals and the objects themselves are greeted with delight by many people. There seem to be several factors in their success. First, they rely on evocative materials and mappings, without resorting to obvious metaphors – in fact, it can be argued that they are not symbolic at all, or perhaps that metaphor is employed in literary rather than didactic ways. A second factor is their physicality and use of senses not typically addressed by technology. The effect of the Feather, for instance, would seem less powerful or poetic if it were merely simulated onscreen. Finally, they open new functional domains for awareness technology, suggesting that peripheral awareness is important in supporting emotional as well as working relationships.

KISS, HEARTBEATS, AND OTHER POSSIBILITIES 

A number of other designs intended to convey emotional messages have been explored. For example, members of a student initiated workshop held at the Delft University of Technology (Society of Industrial Design Engineering Students, 1997) suggested a simple system that transmits heartbeat information from one lover to another. Taking the form of a brooch or pendant, perhaps, such a system would monitor the heartbeat of one lover to control a display worn by another. Although it was only simulated using video, the results were surprisingly powerful. Even with simple displays, the direct reflection of another’s heartbeat seems capable of creating a powerful sense of connection.

Rachel Murphy, an interaction designer and jeweller, explored a variety of other possibilities for emotional communications. These including devices to be worn in the ear which warm up when a partner object is heated with the breath (Figure 5), or a pendant with small streamers which blow around in response to a distant partner’s voice. Her focus differed from that taken by the Delft students in emphasising how the sensual experience evoked by various materials and interactions might be appropriated for use in conveying emotion.

Finally, the Kiss Communicator, designed by Heather Martin and Duncan Kerr of IDEO (Barley, 1999) is a more sophisticated tool for supporting intimate communication. Inspired by the idea of blowing a kiss to an absent lover, the Communicator is a rounded, handheld device with embedded sensors, processing, and communications facilities, and a display created by coloured LED’s (Figure 6). Blowing on the device creates ripples of light that move just under the surface of the translucent object. Once a desirable pattern of has been achieved it can be sent to the partner device using the communications software, so the partner will see the same pattern. Expression is achieved by varying the force of the blow, for instance modulating from a gentle sigh to a harsher puff of breath.

By conveying the breath, the Kiss Communicator carries an intimate signal to the partner. It clearly relates to Feather, Scent and Shaker in providing a medium for intimate communication. Moreover, the large range of patterns that can be formed, combined with the ability to choose which patterns to send, potentially allows a more complex language to emerge from its use, one which can be more deliberately controlled than that suggested by the Shaker and similar objects. Most importantly, however, in reflecting the breath of a partner, it combines the directness of a heartbeat monitor with a rich and sensuous material aesthetics, suggesting that it might well allow a directly expressive form of communication.

REFLECTING ON EMOTIONAL COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS 

Despite a growing number of design experiments dealing with conveying emotions, there has been little explicit consideration of the hypotheses about emotional communication that these concept prototypes imply. Here I raise several issues that are important in thinking about this work. First, it seems important to distinguish systems that actually communicate emotions from those that simply evoke them. Devices that provide direct indications of physical or sensuous activities such as the heartbeat, the breath, or physical movement might serve as a true medium for expressing emotions to one another. Alternatively, devices might be closer to triggering emotional reactions or mimicking the effects of emotional communication insofar as their effects depend on sensuous forms, materials, or interactions.

The poetry of designs such as the Feather, for instance – from the picture frame to the feather itself – rely on the particular materials employed, and their abilities to evoke emotional responses. In terms of the information transmitted, the picture frame might as well be replaced with a pushbutton, and the feather with a light. If this reduces the system’s emotional resonance, it is because of a change of materials, not the potential for interaction. As it is, when the feather drifts in its plexiglas enclosure there is no way to tell whether it is in response to a distant lover staring adoringly into the picture frame, a perfunctory shake given the picture frame before going out, or the frame being dusted by a cleaner. Given these limitations, the devices may be too constrained or sentimental to be emotionally satisfying in the long run – for instance, there is no way to argue or express displeasure using the devices, except implicitly by refusing to send a message. Finally, because the display is created by a designer, it may become relatively impersonal for the people using it, as clichéd and inauthentic as a greeting card.

The appeal of the Feather is in its materials; its limitations come from the constrained interactions it allows. Systems such as the Shaker, the heartbeat monitor, or the Kiss Communicator, on the other hand, imply richer possibilities. The emotion is not in the form of their output, but in the dynamics of their use; it is in their interactivity that the emotional nature of the messages lies. It should not be inferred from this that evoking emotions is necessarily less desirable because it might be less sincere than more direct communication: a dozen roses delivered to the door is usually considered a welcome signal of affection even if a clearly symbolic, asynchronous, and mediated one. Instead, the point is that issues about what it means to evoke emotions versus communicate them – or whether what is being conveyed is emotion versus some visceral sense of presence – have not been explored deeply in the design of these new forms of communication. In the long run, balancing the directness and richness of designs like the heartbeat monitor to the aesthetic richness of designs like the Feather is the challenge in creating devices that engender fulfilling emotional experiences.

Related to this, we have only begun to understand the tradeoffs involved in creating a deep sense of intimacy while retaining autonomy. Direct access to one another’s heartbeat, for instance, may create a powerful sense of physical intimacy, even at a distance, but it may also lead to problems in negotiating privacy. What is one to think if one’s lover’s heartbeat starts pounding strongly in one’s absence? While creating a sense of union at a distance may be desirable, it raises a conflict between the desire for intimacy and that for personal autonomy that must be addressed with delicacy.

Workplace awareness systems have tended to address privacy either by assuring symmetry or allowing senders to set how much information is revealed. Neither of these is entirely satisfactory for emotional communication, however. Symmetry may redress one-sided monitoring or intrusion, but by enforcing equal losses of autonomy. Privacy settings allow more fluid transitions between intimacy and autonomy, but the explicit act of changing settings to reduce intimacy, however, itself may convey an undesirable emotional messages. Design proposals for emotional communication devices have thus relied on two other strategies little explored in workplace system (though see Hudson and Smith, 1996): either sending information is made an explicit act, or systems use minimal, impressionistic messages. These strategies reduce the peripheral nature of sharing information in complementary ways. Explicitly sending information is a foreground activity for the sender, while potentially remaining in the periphery of the receivers’ attention. Sending impressionistic images, in contrast, may be peripheral for the sender, while requiring more attention from the recipient to interpret.

If issues of directness and autonomy are not well understood, it is in part because emotional communication itself is mysterious. Devices meant to support it are relatively new, their designs based on relatively unarticulated intuitions, and tests of their ability to produce emotional connections limited to demonstrations of prototypes. They are valuable in spurring the imaginations of viewers, who can at least give an intuitive prediction of whether the experiences might be fulfilling. Longer-term tests in real situations, however, seem clearly necessary to understand better the issues involved in using technology to mediate intimate communications.

Sociocultural awareness 

Just as awareness can be extended from workplace systems to the support of more intimate personal relations, so they might be applied to systems found in public places. Raby’s Bench Object, for example, was designed to be deployed in a public building, raising issues of the relations between technology and the ways we negotiate privacy and involvement in public spaces. Confronting people with such visceral contact might be uncomfortable, but is meant to emphasise and criticise the degree to which people in urban environments – crowded together on subways, for example, or jostling along busy streets – can simultaneously be physically close, and yet mentally, emotionally, and culturally quite far apart. The Bench Object is a starting point finding ways to reconnect people in urban spaces.

The Bench Object also points to possibilities for expanding upon awareness technologies in CSCW. It is possible that strategies used to allow working colleagues to be peripherally aware of one another’s activities might also be valuable in increasing mutual awareness of separated urban inhabitants. Where the need for workplace awareness is often satisfied by information about the presence and activities of remote colleagues, however, community awareness might benefit more from information about attitudes, values, and cultures.

THE SCHEDULE 

A project which I pursued in collaboration with Apple Computer illustrates the range from instrumental to cultural awareness. The goal of the Schedule was to develop a visualisation of the Computer Related Design course’s timetable to be projected in a public space. Initially, the research was intended to test whether the affordances of such a display would lead to greater accountability amongst the staff and students of the course. We displayed a very simple version (Figure 7) over a few months, and it worked. Meetings tended to start on time, and not get rescheduled too often.

The visualisation seemed ugly, however, so we set a student project to design different representations of the schedule. With about half a dozen alternative visualisations being developed (see Figure 8 for examples), it became clear that the differences among them had less to do with the functionality of the visualisations – though of course these varied – and more to do with the cultural implications of the aesthetics they employed. Some seemed friendly and happy, with smiling people or flowers representing events. Others seemed cold or even hostile, using abstract slabs of material or even gigantic cogwheels that emphasised the mechanical nature of the school year.

Considering a wide range of representations for the same sort of awareness information emphasises the distinction between perceptual cues meant to inform and those meant to evoke emotional and imaginative reactions. The particular aesthetics of the interface – whether it is austere, businesslike, or friendly – convey cultural messages, not only to those within the group using them, but to outsiders. The choice of a metaphor used to express the course schedule, for instance, is not merely constrained by how well it maps to the nature of events or to time itself, but also to whether it implies the course to be relentless, humane, joyful, or alien. Even more abstract representations have connotative effects in the aesthetics they employ, their choice of colours, forms, and visual style.

That elements of form tangential to a product’s core functionality send powerful cultural messages is familiar to anybody who has bought their own clothing, yet it often seems overlooked in the development of high technologies. This has implications for any software, from word processors to virtual environments, but particularly for those aimed at supporting collaboration. It is impossible to avoid the sociocultural messages conveyed by designs, or the constraints they place on the peripheral messages that might be sent. Moreover, it is possible to use them, to create effects that provide a useful context for the more focused information that is the explicit aim of the system.

PROJECTED REALITIES 

Another example of a project exploring how systems providing awareness information might be used in public spaces was aimed at enhancing the presence of the elderly in their local communities. This work was undertaken as a part of Presence, a European Union project that involved 7 partners from 4 countries, working with 3 communities (see Gaver and Hooker, 2001; Gaver and Dunne, 1999). The Projected Realities system focused on the Bijlmer, a troubled area outside of Amsterdam. A large planned community, based on Le Corbusier’s Radient City, it was initially conceived to provide more pastoral settings for workers from Amsterdam. Today it is an area with a very bad reputation within the Netherlands. With high unemployment, crime, and a large immigrant community, it is viewed as a dangerous and unpleasant place to live.

In familiarising ourselves with the area (see Gaver et al., 1999), we realised that despite its problems the Bijlmer has many attractions. It is culturally rich community: the influx of immigrants means that many diverse traditions colour its hidden markets, meeting places, and places of worship. It has a strong sense of place, and people identify themselves as part of the community. And it can indeed be a pleasant area, particularly in the spring or summer, when people bring their caged birds outside to sing in the parklands that surround the massive housing blocks.

In designing a system to enhance the presence of older people, then, our initial focus on the area’s security problems grew to encompass broader issues concerning the mixture of different cultures and attitudes. Realising that local inhabitants felt the area’s notoriety was exaggerated, we wanted our system to communicate both within the Bijlmer and between the Bijlmer and the rest of the Netherlands, allowing local citizens both to discuss the area’s problems and celebrate its unique multicultural advantages.

The Projected Realities system was designed to collect the opinions and attitudes of individuals and combine them into increasingly more public formats (Figure 9). The prototype system consists of four connected elements:
Elders were asked to generate slogans – short statements about their lives and the Bijlmer – and collect images in meetings before the system was tested. Each slogan and image was rated along three dimensions to produce a crude numerical representation of its meaning. 
Volunteers were given booklets containing “menus” of the images to take home. Periodically they were telephoned in their flats by an automatic telemarketing system running from a central server in a local flat. The system would prompt them to use touchtones to select the picture that most accurately reflected their mood of the moment. 
The numerical representations of selected images from a group of volunteers were amalgamated into a summary score. This controlled the selection of one of a set of slogans displayed on sloganbenches set in local neighbourhood (see Figure 10). The sloganbenches incorporated mechanical scrolls with the elders’ slogans written upon them; controlled via touchtones sent by CB radio, they reflected the attitudes of phone volunteers. In addition, buttons allowed passers-by to change the slogans themselves. 
Periodically, the server polled the benches to determine which slogans were being displayed. Results from the three benches were again amalgamated, and used to select images to be shown on an imagebank incorporating five 28inch monitors in a large cabinet (see Figure 11). Originally intended to be set along a roadside on the outskirts of the Bijlmer, for practical reasons we tested this piece in a well-trafficked area near a tram station within the Bijlmer itself.
The system was designed to create a spreading expression of attitudes within the Bijlmer, with feedback and feedforward components. Displays on the imagebank and sloganbenches were not simply chosen by individuals or groups, but responded to choices made by individuals in their homes, or working with the sloganbenches. Each of the public displays thus acted as an imprecise barometer of local attitudes, with an emergent pattern of issues and attitudes radiating from homes to neighbourhood, and finally to a kind of public face for the area.

The Projected Realities system relies on the same kinds of peripheral awareness as systems that are proposed for office places or businesses. The images and text are not offered for focused scrutiny on a day to day level. Instead the intention is that they would become part of the background of peoples’ lives, like billboards or signposts, that they might notice as they passed on their way to work, to shop, or to socialise.

FROM WORKGROUP TO CULTURAL AWARENESS 

The Schedule and Projected Realities systems illustrate how peripheral awareness can extend beyond defined workgroups to larger and more diverse cultures. On the one hand, this sort of awareness may be an unintended side-effect of the forms and aesthetics used to achieve a different primary goal, as when multiple redesigns of the Schedule highlighted the messages that might be conveyed about the atmosphere and tone of the course itself. On the other hand, cultural awareness might be the intended aim of a design as it was with the Projected Realities system.

The aesthetics and tone of an interface can be useful in conveying information about the cultural values of those who use it, but the point is not simply that interfaces should be aesthetically crafted, and certainly not that they should necessarily be beautiful. Instead, designers need to develop sensitivity to, and control of, aesthetics in order to convey desirable connotations, or at least to avoid conveying undesirable ones. Sometimes this is achieved through crafted designs, but other times it can be realised through constraints put on communications media. For instance, constraining the sloganbenches to accept handwritten slogans was useful in emphasising their non-commercial nature.

Systems such as these also raise issues about the media appropriate to support peripheral awareness. For instance, the sloganbenches used text to convey hints about peoples’ concerns and attitudes. This seems counterintuitive, as reading text usually seems to require focused attention that would disrupt ongoing tasks. Nonetheless, public advertising, clearly meant to be picked up at the periphery of viewers’ attention, often relies on a substantial amount of text. This may have to do with the different primary activities involved in different situations. In business contexts centred on reading, writing, and talking, text often seems too distracting to use for awareness systems (though see Redström et al., 2000). If the primary task is travelling through the city, on the other hand, there seems plenty of spare attention to devote to reading short written pieces.

As with all peripheral awareness systems, it is difficult to gather reliable evidence about the effectiveness of systems such as the Schedule or Projected Realities. On the one hand, our experience with using the Schedule over several months indicated that it worked well within our group, but there were few or no indications about how it was perceived by people outside the department. The Projected Realities system was tested briefly within the Bijlmer, and reactions were positive – people found the benches and imagebank intriguing but not alienating, and thought that the slogans and images were appropriate for raising awareness within and outside of the Bijlmer. But, as with emotional communications prototypes, these events can only be indicative about possible long-term reactions.

From work to everyday life 

As digital technologies move from the workplace to everyday life, they have tended to bring the values of the workplace with them. Devices such as organisers and PDAs, even computers, scanners, and web browsers all imply that people away from work are concerned with same things they are at work: time management, memo writing, information gathering, and content creation. Equally limiting is most “entertainment software,” which seems to assume that when we’re not working, we’re playing games. There is little recognition of the other activities, desires, and aspirations that technology might support outside the workplace.

The projects described here illustrate both some of the values that technologies might embrace, and possible strategies for supporting them. On the one hand, technology might help bridge the physical distance between people who want to be together. Anybody who has been in a long-term relationship knows that telephones and email provide only a superficial connection with one’s partner. They are unsatisfactory ways of emulating the intimacy of physical co-presence. By using forms of interaction that are more sensuous and less explicit and symbolic, the systems described here might go some way towards allowing a visceral awareness of absent lovers and friends. In the end, even if they are never a totally satisfactory surrogate either – probably a good thing – at least they might complement more explicit forms of communication in bridging separation.

At the opposite extreme, technology might help bridge the emotional and cultural distances that separate cohabitants of urban spaces. Current uses, however, often tend to isolate people, rather than bring them together. Personal stereos allow us to move through the city in our own auditory world. Public televisions or Internet kiosks allow people to disengage with one another and focus on a centralised media spectacle. Mobile phones may allow us to learn about the everyday lives of users as they chat in the street or on public transport, but largely because they have escaped engagement with immediate surroundings.

Such technologies have valuable roles to play in contemporary society. As I have tried to illustrate, however, it is possible to counter their isolating tendencies with systems that bring strangers together. Interventions such as the Bench Object might usefully confront people with the physical presence and sheer visceral reality of other people. Displays like the Schedule might convey messages about the groups using them, beyond their immediate value for coordination. Finally, systems such as Projected Realities might allow people to share their opinions and beliefs as a sort of legitimate graffiti, communicating with their neighbours and other communities.

It is fitting that the systems described here should rely on forms of peripheral awareness, because despite their development in and for work environments, systems used to support peripheral awareness in the workplace also have an element of subversion about them. The idea that casual sociality that is not directed towards clearly productive ends might be an important factor in shared work challenges criteria of rational, measurable efficiency for collaborative work systems. Yet this idea seems, at times, to be gaining credence within the industry. It might even be hoped that, just as peripheral awareness moves from workplace systems to those supporting everyday life in the home or the community, so will values and ideas from those spheres find their way back into the workplace.

The designs I’ve described in this short note also suggest some of the ways workplace awareness systems might expand to embrace more human values. First, designers might experiment with a wider range materials and interactions – such as the heated seats, ear warmers and hand-written slogans described here – that expand the sensory range of telecommunications. These can offer new forms of aesthetic pleasure, allowing systems to evoke deeper and richer experiences on the one hand, and to convey more complex cultural messages on the other. Second, workplace systems could make a virtue of less explicit forms of information, allowing, as the systems described here do, their users to read meaning into fragmentary clues about distant events as a way of encouraging a mutual engagement of imagination. Finally, such systems could more explicitly seek to create links across disparate workplace cultures, allowing people to express their values and attitudes across workgroups both explicitly and through implicit aesthetic choices. By bringing ideas and values from everyday life into the workplace, new awareness systems could not only support collaborative tasks, but collaborative relationships.


TECHNOLOGY AFFORDANCES

ABSTRACT 

Ecological approaches to psychology suggest succinct accounts ofeasily-used artifacts. Affordances are properties of the world that are compatible with and relevant for people’s interactions. When affordances are perceptible, they offer a direct link between perception and action; hidden and false affordances lead to mistakes. Complex actions can be understood in terms of groups of affordances that are sequential in time or nested in space, and in terms of the abilities of different media to reveal them. I illustrate this discussion with several examples of interface techniques, and suggest that the concept of affordances can provide a useful tool for user-centered analyses of technologies.

KEYWORDS: ecological perspectives; human interface design; input/output design; multi-media

INTRODUCTION 

There is a real tension between tasks and technologies in interface design. Designs based primarily on the features of a new technology are often technically aesthetic but functionally awkward. But equally, designs based primarily on users’ current articulated needs and tasks can overlook potential innovations suggested by new technologies. We must understand the needs and abilities of prospective users. But equally, we must understand the capabilities and limitations of technologies in order to know the possibilities they offer for design. 

In this paper, I explore the notion of affordances as a way of focussing on the strengths and weaknesses of technologies with respect to the possibilities they offer the people that might use them. The term “affordance” comes from the perceptual psychologist J. J. Gibson [9, 10], who developed an “ecological” alternative to cognitive approaches. The cognitive approach suggests that people have direct access only to sensations, which are integrated with memories to build up symbolic representations of the environment and its potential for goal-oriented action. This account has recently come under attack, particularly for its decontextualized approach to design [e.g., 4, 17, 19]. In focussing on perception, action, memory and problem-solving “in the head,” its descriptions of action in the world, tool-use, perceptual y-guided learning, etc., often seem baroque and overly complicated.

In contrast, the ecological approach stresses relevant human-scaled objects, attributes and events and the patterns of energy that provide effective perceptual information about them. It eschews detailed accounts of information processing as being unnecessary products of the abnormal situations found in laboratories. In focussing on everyday perception and action, the ecological perspective may offer a more succinct approach to the design of artifacts that suggest relevant and desirable actions in an immediate way. Cognitive approaches, from this perspective, are best reserved for artifacts which are complex, difficult to use, and error-prone.

The notion of affordances is in many ways the epitome of the ecological approach, encapsulating ideas about ecological physics, perceptual information, and the links between perception and action. In this account, affordances are the fundamental objects of perception. People perceive the environment directly in terms of its potentials for action, without significant intermediate stages involving memory or inferences. For instance, we perceive stairways in terms of their “climbability,” a measurable property of the relationship between people and stairs. The work required to climb a flight of stairs can be described by a U-shaped function relating work to riser height and leg length. Warren [18] showed that people’s visually-guided judgments of the climbability of different staircases reflect this function with great accuracy: people perceive the affordance of stairclimbing.

An affordance of an object, such as one for climbing, refers to attributes of both the object and the actor. This makes the concept a powerful one for thinking about technologies because it focuses on the interaction between technologies and the people who will use them. However, the concept raises issues from many different domains: perception and action, metaphor and learning, and techniques for input and output. A simple example from everyday life can illustrate the sorts of issues that must be addressed before the notion of affordances can be made precise and useful.

WHAT ARE AFFORDANCES? 

The concept of affordances is not a new one for design. Most notably, Norman [15] applied the concept to everyday artifacts. For instance, thin vertical doorhandles afford pulling, while flat horizontal plates afford pushing (Figure 1).

The interaction of a handle with the human motor system determines its affordances. When grasping a vertical bar, the hand and arm are in a configuration from which it is easy to pull; when contacting a flat plate pushing is easier. We can perceive the affordances of doorhandles because the attributes relevant for grasping are available for perception. Finally, the course from perception to action seems a direct one, implying an ease of learning desirable for artifacts. However, perceptual information may suggest affordances that do not actually exist; while those that do may not be perceivable. For instance, vertical doorhandles suggest pulling, but doors may be locked. In general, when the apparent affordances of an artifact matches its intended use, the artifact is easy to operate. When apparent affordances suggest different actions than those for which the object is designed, errors are common and signs are necessary.

This example illustrates several important aspects of affordances. Below I develop the idea of affordances as properties of the environment relevant for action systems, consider how they might be perceived, and note the effects of culture on their perception. In the end I offer a definition that seems broad enough to be interesting for design, yet narrow enough to be useful.

Complementarity of Action 

Affordances imply the complementarily of the acting organism and the acted-upon environment. Most fundamentally, affordances are properties of the world that make possible some action to an organism equipped to act in certain ways. Whether a handle with particular dimensions will afford grasping depends on the grasper’s height, hand size, etc. Similarly, a cat-dcxx affords passage to a cat but not to me, while a doorway may afford passage to me but not somebody taller. Affordances, then, are properties of the world defined with respect to people’s interaction with it.

Tools afford different actions. For instance, mechanics use a myriad of different tweezers, pliers and clamps to take advantage of the variations in their affordances for grasping. In interfaces, a similar diversity of input devices (e.g., keyboards, mice, touch tablets) and onscreen cursors (e.g., arrows, brushes, hands) offer various affordances for interaction [1].

Perception and inter-referentiability

Distinguishing affordances from perceptual information about them is useful in understanding ease of use. Common examples of affordances refer to perceptible affordances, in which there is perceptual information available for an existing affordance (Figure 2). If there is no information available for an existing affordance, it is hidden and must be inferred from other evidence. If information suggests a nonexistent affordance, a false affordance exists upon which people may mistakenly try to act. Finally, people will usually not think of a given action when there is no affordance for it nor any perceptual information suggesting it.

Making affordances perceptible is one approach to designing easily-used systems. Perceptible affordances are inter-referential: the attributes of the object relevant for action are available for perception [cf. 6]. What is perceived is what is acted upon. This situation contrasts with one in which perceived attributes must be related to those relevant for action by a mediating representation. Perceiving that a doorhandle affords pulling does not require a mediating concept because the attributes relevant to pulling areavailable forperception. Knowing that a key should be turned inside a lock does require mediation because the relevant attributes are not available. 

From this point of view, interfaces may offer perceptible affordances because they can offer information about objects which may be acted upon, We can understand displays in terms of the subset of normally available perceptual information various media make available for various actions [cf. 9, 10]. For instance, the onscreen buttons shown in Figure 3 appear to be raised from the background, to have depth. This is not arbitrary, but the result of refined methods for conveying certain sorts of information. In semiotic terms, the marks are nomically (causally) related to their referents, rather than symbolically or metaphorically. In a sense, nomic mappings do not need to be interpreted, because they do not rely on convention or analogy. Their meaning is directly available to the perceiver [16, 8]. Nomically mapped graphical objects can provide information about affordances when the information conveyed graphically corresponds to attributes of the system that are relevant for action.

Culture, Experience and Learning 

The actual perception of affordances will of course be determined in part by the observer’s culture, social setting, experience and intentions. Like Gibson I do not consider these factors integral to the notion, but instead consider culture, experience, and so forth as highlighting certain affordances. Distinguishing affordances and the available information about them from their actual perception allows us to consider affordances as properties that can be designed and analyzed in their own terms. Learning can be seen as a process of discriminating patterns in the world, as opposed to one of supplementing sensory information with past experience. From this perspective, my culture and experiences may determine the choice of examples I use here, but not the existence of the examples themselves.

Affordances Are... 

The concept of affordances points to a rather special configuration of properties. It implies that the physical attributes of the thing to be acted upon are compatible with those of the actor, that information about those attributes is available in a form compatible with a perceptual system, and (implicitly) that these attributes and the action they make possible are relevant to a culture and a perceiver. Artifacts may be analyzed to see how close they are to this configuration of properties, and thus what affordances they convey.

For instance, MacLean et al. [13] discuss a user-tailorable system of onscreen buttons and their experiences introducing them to non-technical users (Figure 3). Users intuitively understood that these buttons could be “pressed” using the mouse, but their tailorable attributes were not spontaneously manipulated. MacLean et al. interpret this as implying the need for a “tailoring culture” to support users [see also 5]. But consider what needed to be supported. Buttons appear to afford pressing but not moving because they appear to protrude from the underlying surface. They do not appear to afford tailoring because they don’t suggest decomposition. They appear and act as unitary objects – one of their advantages as an interface metaphor - with the drawback that they do not afford much except pressing.

Just as the affordances of door handles imply the complementarily of handles and the motor system, so do the affordances of onscreen buttons imply the complementarily of buttons and mouse-driven cursors. Various graphical techniques allow us to perceive the pressability of an onscreen button, and the course from perception to action seems as direct as it does for doorhandles. And again, perceptual information maybe misleading about the affordances of buttons; in this case the ability to move or edit buttons is not supported perceptually.

AFFORDANCES FOR COMPLEX ACTIONS 

The account above emphasizes perceptual information for affordances that can be obtained via relatively passive perception. But there often seems to be too little information available for the perception of more complex affordances. How do we know to turn a pivoting door handle? Do scrollbars afford scrolling?

The notion of affordances may be extended to explicitly include exploration. For instance, the pivoting door handle shown in Figure 4 may appear to afford grasping, but passive observation will probably not indicate the affordance of turning it or using it to open the door. However, once grasped (B), a random or exploratory press downwards will convey tactile information revealing the affordance of turning the handle. When the handle is fully turned (C), the new configuration is one from which pulling is natural. The results of a pull will indicate whether the door affords opening or not.

What is true for door handles again seems true for interfaces. For instance, the Macintosh serollbox (Figure 5A) may appear to afford grabbing, but visual information probably does not indicate an affordance of dragging it or using it to scroll a window. However, just as grasping a door handle is likely to lead to tactile information indicating turning, so is grabbing the Macintosh scrollbox likely to move it, leading to visual information about its affordance of dragging. In addition, the vertical grey shaft which encloses the scroll box perceptibly affords one sort of dragging – up and down – but not others, such as side to side.

These are examples of sequential ajb-dances, a concept I introduce to refer to situations in which acting on a perceptible affordance leads to information indicating new affordances. The Macintosh scrollbox offers a sequence of affordances - dragging is a natural progression from grabbing. In contrast, Smalltalk 80 scrollbars do noc the scrollbar cannot be grabbed. Instead, scrolling requires moving the cursor over the scrollbar to change the cursor into an arrow pointing up, down, or sideways, and pressing one of the mouse’s buttons (Figure 5B). The Smalltalk scrollbar lacks inter-referentiality: There is nothing to coordinate perception and action with the device, no way to take advantage of obvious affordances to explore others.

Sequential affordances explain how affordances can be revealed over time nested affordances describe affordances that are grouped in space. For instance, a handle alone only appears to afford pulling. A door alone may suggest an affordance for manipulation due to its partial separation from the wall, but not what sort of manipulation will be effective. Only by seeing the affordance of pulling the handle as nested within an affordance of pulling the door can opening the door be a perceptible affordance. Similarly, an onscreen window may appear to afford uncovering if the occlusion of its contents is apparent, and a scrollbox may afford dragging. A perceptible affordance of scrolling the window relies on seeing the affordance of dragging the scrollbox to uncover the window. In each case, the nested affordance offers itself both as an end in itself, and as a means towards realizing another affordance.

In general, the affordances of complex objects are often grouped by the continuity of information about activities they reveal. Affordances are not passively perceived, but explored. This point of view leads to a reconception of metaphor which emphasizes its role as a design tool for importing consistent affordances from one domain to another. From this perspective, users need not know metaphors explicitly. Exploration of afforded actions leads to discovery of the system, rather than knowledge of the system metaphor leading to expectations of its affordances. Learning is seen as a matter of attention rather than inference. The role of a good interface is to guide attention via well-designed groups of sequential and nested affordances.

MODES, MEDIA, AND AFFORDANCES

Gibson [9] focuses almost exclusively on affordances which may be seen. But affordances may be perceived using other senses as well. As the pivoting handle example suggests, tactile information is a rich source of information for affordances. We can often feel what can be done with something – that it is hot enough to fry an egg, sharp enough to slice a tomato, and so on. Similarly, input devices may make use of tactile affordances. For instance, pressing onscreen buttons is reinforced by pressing mouse buttons, and force-feedback joysticks allow users to feel simulations. We might imagine redesigning three button mice with two of the buttons on the sides; this would offer the affordances of squeezing and pushing.

We can also hear some affordances. Typical examples of affordances depend on attributes of the environment such as the size and orientation of surfaces; such attributes are those about which vision provides information. Sound, on the other hand, conveys information about affordances related to the size, material and internal structure of objects, the location, nature and forces of interactions, and the status of occluded processes [8, 12]. For example, when door handles are turned the sound of the latch may reveal the affordance of moving the door. The sound conveys information for an affordance which can not be seen.

Sounds can similarly reveal affordances of interfaces. For instance, selecting an object in a direct manipulation system might make a sound indicating its size and type, and thus reveal affordances which depend on these attributes (e.g., whether the object can be copied or the results of activating the object) [8]. As with the pivoting door handle, visual information leads to a sequential affordance; consequent auditory information suggests new possibilities. Sounds may also convey information for affordances in ways which supplement graphics, For example, sounds which indicate ongoing processes can reveal affordances for using other interdependent tools, sounds indicating the activities of others can suggest affordances for collaboration, and soon [7].

Just as different modalities can reveal information about affordances, so might we characterize various media in terms of the affordances they make available, For instance, researchers at EuroPARC have been exploring remote communication via computer-controllable audio and video links [2]. Video may support many aspects of face-to-face communication, but it does not seem well-suited for supporting the use of gestures as a communicative tool [11]. An account relating the characteristics of video as a medium for conveying information, the attributes required for effective gesture, and the information necessary to perceive these attributes might allow us to redesign the system to emphasize this desirable affordance.

In general, understanding the affordances offered by media other than graphics can aid in designing transparent systems. When visual affordances can not be designed in systems, the tendency is to turn to symbolic means of conveying information. A more fruitful approach may be to explore other modes as means of communicating affordances for actions.

CONCLUSIONS 

The notion of affordances is appealing in its direct approach towards the factors of perception and action that make interfaces easy to learn and use. As a means for analyzing technologies, affordances should be useful in exploring the psychological claims inherent in artifacts [3] and the rationale of designs [14]. More generally, considering affordances explicitly in design may help suggest ways to improve the usability of new artifacts.

In providing an integrated account of a complex configuration of attributes, the concept provides a simple but powerful means of addressing a broad range of interface issues. This paper lays out a framework for developing ways to apply the notion to design. At the level of detail explored here, the concept provides a valuable way to think about transparent interfaces. It encourages us to consider devices, technologies and media in terms of the actions they make possible and obvious, It can guide us in designing artifacts which emphasize desired affordances and reemphasize undesired ones. Perhaps most important, it allows us to focus not on technologies or users alone, but on the fundamental interactions between the two.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

I thank Rachel Bellamy for initial discussions about these ideas. Many other people have provided valuable insights as the ideas have developed. In particular, I thank Bob Anderson, Victoria Bellotti, Jonathan Grudin, Christian Heath, Allan MacLean, Tom Moran, Don Norman, Gary Olson, Judy Olson, and Anne Schlottmann.


PROJECTED REALITIES: CONCEPTUAL DESIGN FOR CULTURAL EFFECT

ABSTRACT 

As a part of a European Union sponsored project, we have proposed a system which aggregates people’s expressions over a widening network of public electronic displays in a massive Dutch housing development. Reflecting ideas from contemporary arts as well as from research on media spaces, this is an example of a conceptual design intended to produce meaningful effects on a local culture. In this paper, we describe the methods and ideas that led to this proposal, as an example of research on technologies from the traditions of artist-designers.

Keywords: design research, conceptual art, collaborative systems, awareness

INTRODUCTION 

As a part of the two-year, European Union funded Presence project, we are working to find innovative interaction techniques that can help increase the presence of the elderly within their local communities.

One of the communities we are working with is the Bijlmer: a large planned housing development just outside Amsterdam in the Netherlands [see 21. Built in the early 70’s, it is made up of dozens of buildings, each 10 stories tall and averaging 1.5 km long, set in green parkland with canals, ponds, fields and forests. The Bijlmer has an extremely poor reputation in the Netherlands--only partially deserved, we now believe-with widespread unemployment, drug abuse, and crime.

Projected Realities 

After a year of work, we eventually arrived at a proposal for the Projected Realities system, a network of electronic displays with which the elders would facilitate people in expressing their opinions and images of the Bijlmer over increasingly larger areas.

The system would involve four main components. Commercial scanners would be reconfigured into furniture, for transport on trolleys, or to hang on walls. Elders could use the scanner devices to mediate the collection of digital images from local inhabitants. These images-perhaps of photographs, objects, or faces-would be stored in a central database, along with a numerical representation of their emotional content

Mains radio devices would be small displays used at home by elders and other citizens to access images and slogans transmitted from the central database via the existing power lines. The attitudes expressed by their choices would be registered implicitly, or they might also register them more explicitly.

Sloganfurniture, mainly in the outdoor areas of the Bijlmer, would use text displays to show a selection of provocative statements compiled by the elders. Pedestrians could choose their own slogan to display among 30 or so options, or watch as slogans change automatically, reflecting local attitudes aggregated from nearby mains radio devices. 

The images scanned by the elders would be displayed on large electronic image boards set along the roads and rail lines that ring the Bijlmer. The selection would depend on the values displayed by groups of slogan furniture linked to a particular image board. Commuters and travellers would thus be afforded new views into the area, beyond the sights of the foreboding housing blocks themselves. 

This network of electronic displays would project an increasingly coherent expression of the Bijlmer, encouraging inhabitants to reflect on their own values, those of the diverse cultural groups sharing the district, and those of the surrounding culture. A nervous system for the Bijlmer, it would help to provoke awareness of the existing community both to inhabitants and to the surrounding culture. 

Design Research 

The Projected Realities proposal may sound unusual to the CHI community. In this paper, we hope to explain how we developed the design, and the rationale behind it. 

The proposal is an example of our approach to research on technologies from the traditions of artist-designers [see 7, 121. Our intention-and our brief-in this project was not to tackle the Bijlmer’s apparent problems directly, nor to produce a public art work that merely comments on the situation. Instead, our primary concern has been to find new ways that technology can enter and affect everyday culture. Thus the Projected Realities proposal resembles a media space in its emphasis on peripheral awareness and communication, but uses unusual devices, images and statements to encourage new forms of engagement for the local elders. This emphasis on offering new opportunities through design rather than solving problems underlies much of what we do and how we do it. 

This paper is organised around three aspects of our work that we would particularly like to illustrate. First, in our version of user studies, we were interested in opening a dialog about possibilities with the elders, rather than diagnosing their problems, and so used techniques from the conceptual arts to provoke their reactions, instead of more scientific methods to study their needs. 

Second, the ways we developed and communicated ideas also reflected an arts-design tradition. In this tradition, the designer’s subjective stance is an important part of the design process. Our methods were intended to acknowledge this and encourage both our own creativity and that of the elders. In generating ideas for the Bijlmer, we used brainstorming over time and visual problem-solving to develop design ideas synthesising our views of the area. In presenting them to the groups, we used impressionistic images and narratives to sketch out the cultural effects we intended to make. We hope to show that, while unconventional for most HCI practitioners, techniques like these are appropriate and effective methods for generating innovative designs-thus our decision to devote l/3 of this paper to a stream of images parallelling the text. 

Finally, the resulting designs themselves are positioned in an intellectual context of design and art, rather than science or engineering. This project, for example, takes insights from media space research [e.g., 41, but uses conceptual art strategies [e.g., 91 to situate them in an urban environment. In discussing our work, we would like to illustrate how the arts can serve as basic research for this kind of design. 

UNDERSTANDING THE USERS: CULTURAL PROBES 

To start the project, we gave cultural probes to the 10 members of the elder group: packets of maps, postcards, photo albums and other items to which they could respond and post back to us.

We designed the probes in response to a number of converging concerns. The brief of the Presence Project, to increase the presence of elders in their local communities, allows us wide latitude in our choice of interpretation, technologies, and approaches. With the ability to pursue an experimental approach to our designs, we didn’t need information about the elders, so much as inspiration-clues about their attitudes, their aesthetics, and their desires.

The strategy we took in designing the probes borrows from a tradition of cultural provocation in the arts stemming from Dada or the Surrealists [l0], in which tactics of ambiguity, absurdity, or opacity are used to strip away habitual interpretations and open new possibilities. For instance, the probes are reminiscent of the Fluxus yearboxes [9], in which whimsical and humourous objects, often readymades, were presented in package form.

The Cultural Probes were particularly influenced by the Situationists [l,ll]. A radical group centred in Paris from the late ‘50’s to the 70’s, they used a variety of strategies to counter the all-encompassing, media-fuelled “Spectacle” created by commercial culture. For instance, the maps included in the probes echo their psychogeographic maps, which showed the varying emotional neighbourhoods of urban areas in ways that official maps do not represent. More generally, we tried to emulate their tactics of pleasure and intrigue as a means of discovery, taking them to more traditional concerns of user centred design.

The Probe Materials 

The probe materials addressed people’s emotional, aesthetic, and experiential reactions to their environments, but in open-ended, provocative, and oblique ways. For instance, one of the half dozen maps we included-each in the form of an unfolded envelope to be mailed back to us--asked “if the Bijlmer were a body...” and included precut stickers showing images of limbs, ears, eyes, and internal organs to identify corresponding parts of the area. Postcards asked questions such as “tell us a piece of advice,” or “why do we have politicians?” A disposable camera, repackaged to remove it from its commercial origins, included a list of requests for photographs such as “what you will wear today,” “something beautiful,” or “something ugly,” while leaving l0-15 shots to be chosen freely. Finally, a small photo album was included, with the request to send us “6 - 10 pictures that tell us your story.”

Giving and Receiving 

The probes succeeded not only in eliciting materials that inspired our designs, but also in provoking the elders to respond to our experimental approach. When presented to the group, they sparked intense discussions with the elders about our intentions, their lives, and the community. In the weeks following our return we received large amounts of material in the post-about half the items in all, though some only included notes about why they weren’t completed, which we had encouraged in case of difficulty. The hundreds of pictures, maps and postcards offered a surprising and intimate view of the area which was crucial for our designs.

Several features of the probes seemed to play a role in their success. First, we tried to avoid stereotypes of elders as needy or feeble, instead focusing both on their rich experiences, and their opportunities for life free from the need to work. Adopting this attitude meant, in part, that we felt able to challenge or provoke them with the probes. Second, the probe materials were preaddressed and stamped to be returned to us separately. This emphasised their flexibility and our lives in another country, undermining the typical unapproachability of scientific experts. Finally, the probe materials were crafted to be pleasurable and intriguing, yet not professionally finished, They reflected the energy we had put into them, and revealed our tastes and interests to the group. At the same time, they used a slightly clinical aesthetics to encourage detachment and curiosity.

The materials were not designed for a summary analysis. Instead, most of what we learned from the Cultural Probes was articulated through our designs, rather than in explicit reports. We thought of the proposals as our turn in a conversation that had started with the probes and continued with the elders’ responses. Presenting the proposals to the group implied our perceptions of themselves and their community, as well as suggesting possibilities for change.

METHODS: EXPLORATIONS AND SKETCHES 

As returns from the Cultural Probes gathered, we started to generate ideas about designs for the Bijlmer. This was done in two phases. In the first phase, we generated a loose collection of proposals and presented them to the group and our colleagues for discussion. In the second phase, we used their reactions to focus and integrate the concepts into the current proposal. In this section, we discuss our method for developing and presenting the two rounds of proposals. In the next section, we describe the proposals themselves and their conceptual underpinnings.

Brainstorming in Slow Motion 

In developing our proposal for the Bijlmer, we started by exploring a wide space of ideas, knowing that we would narrow them progressively later in the project. This initial exploration was analogous to the traditional brainstorming sessions familiar to designers, in which people toss out as many ideas as possible, with none being criticised and all recorded. Exploring seemingly impractical ideas is useful in this process, often allowing the discovery of new spaces for design.

In practice, learning from improbable ideas takes time, but traditional brainstorming sessions tend to be relatively brief. Although ideas are not supposed to be evaluated in brainstorms, groups often reject ideas that seem too conservative or too frivolous. With little time to explore ideas deeply, it is difficult to go beyond obvious or familiar possibilities. We found that intermittent, ongoing conversations about ideas worked better for our group than focused brainstorming sessions, allowing our ideas to be filtered naturally over time.

For example, security was an overriding issue as we started to generate ideas, in part due to returns from the probes stressing the “junkies and thieves” in the area. Sparked off by a chance photograph of the area, we started thinking about cages for the elders, in which they could sit or walk safely outside.

The idea of cages for elders is clearly an insulting idea, one we would never propose seriously. From a conceptual perspective, however, developing the notion was a useful (if crude) way to highlight the problems of designing purely to combat fear. The images and stories we explored reminded us throughout our later designs that if we overemphasised security, the systems we produced might themselves become electronic cages.

Having adopted an extreme view of the area as a dangerous no-man’s land made contradictory evidence of the everyday social life in the area more noticeable. We started to attend to images that revealed this more homely side of the Bijlmer: people gardening or picnicking in the parkland surrounding the housing blocks, or enjoying parties within. Eventually, these two perspectives became integrated in our view of the Bijlmer as enjoying a rich cultural life in a harsh environment, and made us aware that its undesirable reputation is neither wholly deserved, nor an accurate reflection of the inhabitants’ feelings.

Brainstorming over time allowed these ideas to grow or be discarded naturally, without undue need for explicit justification or criticism. Instead of analysing fundamental needs to guide design, we clarified our understanding of the Bijlmer through designs that synthesised our responses to the many sources of evidence we had.

Impressionistic Scenarios 

In our designs, we focused on the kinds of social or cultural interventions that might be meaningful, rather than specific instantiations. Insofar as we discussed particular artifacts, they were placeholders, embodying the kinds of possibilities we wanted from our designs, but not necessarily the particular technologies or forms. Sketches of devices or system were a way of thinking through issues and possibilities for us, were always understood to be provisional.

Communicating ideas at this level was a challenge when we presented them to the elders for feedback: if the ideas were presented too abstractly, people could not imagine living with the systems; if they were presented too concretely, the elders would focus on the details rather than the overall intentions. In both phases, then, we sought to present our ideas in a way that would encourage people to consider the cultural effects the systems might make, rather than the specific devices implementing them.

For the first phase of design we approached this by compiling an impressionistic book of images and text to sketch our ideas. To convey the openness of the proposals, we mixed a wide range of graphical styles in the presentation, from diagrams overlaid on photographs, to collages, to relabeled mail-order catalogs. Text was used as a kind of background to the collection, separating categories and explaining the intentions of our ideas. Using this plethora of styles, we tried to create a kind of filmic feeling to the presentation, allowing people to explore the space of possibilities as if glimpsing fictional worlds in which they already existed.

For the second phase, we produced a series of interactive simulations to be used onscreen in order to capture the experience of using the systems and seeing them change over time. The core of the presentation was an overview of the system, and simple, more specific pieces showing each element. In addition to the specific proposals, we also included a “catalog of parts,” which allowed people to scroll through and see different elements that might appear in the system. This worked well in allowing us to become more specific about the kinds of artifacts we had in mind, while still exploring a space of possibilities.

Both the storybook and interactive simulations encouraged the elders-and us-to imagine the world implied by our designs, rather than deciding whether or not the specific examples made sense. We wanted them to enter this world for a while, to tell us what their everyday lives might be like, and about the successes and failures they might anticipate. For them to envision it this way helped us develop the ideas in realistic directions, a more precise and useful process than merely accepting or rejecting ideas wholesale.

RESULTS: DESIGN FOR CULTURAL EFFECTS 

The proposals developed through this process responded to our perceptions of the elders’ lives in the Bijlmer, and the possibilities we saw for increasing communication and awareness in the area. They capture the results of the Probes, and our brainstorming over time. In addition, they reflect the influence of the arts as well as more traditional issues from HCI and CSCW.

Three Clusters 

Our initial design stage resulted in three clusters of ideas for possible interventions in the Bijlmer. One that appears relatively unchanged in the current proposal is for image boards to be placed along the highways and railtracks ringing the area, showing images scanned by the elderly or perhaps snapshots being developed in photographic shops. This proposal reflects our perception that the Bijlmer’s notoriety is misleading: people are proud of living in this culturally varied community, and would like to challenge its poor reputation.

Three Clusters 

Our initial design stage resulted in three clusters of ideas for possible interventions in the Bijlmer. One that appears relatively unchanged in the current proposal is for image boards to be placed along the highways and railtracks ringing the area, showing images scanned by the elderly or perhaps snapshots being developed in photographic shops. This proposal reflects our perception that the Bijlmer’s notoriety is misleading: people are proud of living in this culturally varied community, and would like to challenge its poor reputation.

The idea of linking security cameras also responded to people’s alienation from the physical fabric of the buildings themselves. Several of our proposals suggested ways to colonise this infrastructure. Inspired by National Geographic articles about telematic devices used to explore volcanoes, reefs, and gopher burrows, we thought of robots that would travel the ventilation system, recording and broadcasting domestic sounds to allow glimpses of other lives. Ultimately, this led us to mains radio technology, which we thought might form the basis of internal intercoms or radio stations.

A final set of ideas updated the Situationists’ psychogeographical maps, already reflected by the cultural probes. The elders could carry psychogeographic pagers, allowing them to signal where they felt afraid, safe, bored, or intrigued. The combined output might appear as maps or public displays, control public lighting, or be read by handheld meters. These ideas again respond to security worries in the Bijlmer, but also to its hidden attractions: markets, underground churches, solitary flower beds and ponds.

The group reacted positively to the ideas, apparently recognising themselves in our suggestions. Image boards were received enthusiastically as a way to counter the area’s bad reputation. Linked security cameras intrigued them, as did the ventrovers, and they agreed with our impression that the friendly mingling of different cultures is a strength of the area. Finally, they clearly understood the idea that psychogeographical pagers could help capture everyday knowledge about good and bad areas within the Bijlmer.

As we discussed living with the systems, however, they raised many issues we hadn’t imagined. For instance, they were afraid that the ventrovers would let thieves know when they weren’t home, and thought linked security cameras might compromise privacy. More fundamentally, they weren’t sure the psychogeographical pagers would be useful because the emotional topology of the area is already a familiar background to their everyday activities. Instead, they suggested the idea was more useful to reassure their friends about visiting them in the Bijlmer and to guide them once they arrived.

Focusing and Integrating 

Informed by the reactions of the elder group in the Bijlmer, we refined and focused our ideas into the more definite proposal for the area outlined at the beginning of this paper. Many of the placeholders were discarded, as some ideas no longer seemed meaningful or practical given the reactions of the group. We didn’t abandon the concepts behind the proposals, however, but instead found new ways to express them within an overall system.

In this process, for instance, the psychogeographical pagers were transformed into the current slogan furniture concept. Rather than try to reveal the good and bad areas of the Bijlmer, it became possible to make explicit people’s existing understandings as a vehicle to promote greater cultural understanding. Slogan furniture became interesting as a way of expressing attitudes about the local environment, and encouraging reflection and communication about different perceptions of the Bijlmer.

Similarly, though literally inhabiting the infrastructure using robots proved undesirable, the idea of using the infrastructure as a link between individual inhabitants and the surrounding community seemed strong. Realising that both the image boards and slogan furniture were allowing expression in public areas, we changed the direction of the mains radio devices to allow individual inhabitants to have access to the community’s culture within their own homes.

An important innovation of the current proposal was in combining the elements into an integrated system. If each were separate, their display would reflect only the individuals or groups who last controlled them. Linked together, however, and their display allows a more organic expression of the culture to emerge. People might display an image at home, and then see local slogan furniture indicating that their neighbours feel the same way. They might see a particular slogan reflecting local attitudes, and change it to send the neighbourhood a different message. Or they might dislike what the local imageboard is showing, and scan new images that better reflect their perceptions. Taken separately, the devices act as means for expression-at home, in the neighbourhood, or to the outside. Together, they take on aspects of a communications medium as well.

APPLYING CONTEMPORARY ART 

In this paper, we have tried to illustrate our approach to working as artist-designers doing research. The effects of working within this conceptual and cultural context can be seen throughout the project, from our strategy for getting to know the users, to our methods of developing and communicating ideas, to the aims and techniques of the proposed system itself.

The Projected Realities proposal needs to be developed further before elements of the system can be put in place in the Bijlmer. We believe the role of design research at this stage is to suggest technologies that are plausible, concentrating on the effects they should achieve rather than details of their implementation. From this point of view, the proposal itself is a finished piece of work, opening new perspectives on the design of technologies for elders in urban communities. It may function like architectural proposals which, even if never built, are influential in the field [e.g., 9].

The Projected Realities system responds to the theme of presence in complex ways. In the home, mains radio devices might allow elders to become more aware of their neighbours, their lives and values. The slogan furniture allow attitudes and values to be more publicly shared or even confronted within the community, while imageboards expand this to the surrounding society. These devices give new ways for the elders to make their presence felt, and to feel the presence of others-but in fact, they amplify, and thus draw attention to, ways that are already present.

Our proposals involve issues familiar to HCI, particularly from work on media spaces [4] demonstrating how technologies used on the periphery of attention can allow new forms of sociality to emerge [6,8].

The approach we took to these technologies, however, were more directly influenced by the work of a number of contemporary artists [see 9]. For instance, Jenny Holtzer has displayed “truisms” in public spaces (e.g.: “children are the hope of the future, ” “children are the most cruel of all”). In provoking people to agree or disagree, these works-clearly referred to by the slogan furniture-ultimately raise questions about the status of such statements. Gillian Wearing photographed people holding signs on which they had written down what they were thinking; we hope the image boards and slogan furniture might elicit insights into people’s attitudes as striking as those she attained. Krzysztof Wodiczko [5] has projected images onto buildings and designed portable shelters for the homeless; our designs are similarly aimed at making local issues apparent. Finally, Atelier Van Lieshout [3] design urban shelters which take a poetic approach to issues of urban survivalism; we are also interested in public furniture hinting at new forms of social inhabitation.

In applying to design the tactics of artists such as these, we are extending the notion of awareness [see 41 from a concern with peoples’ presence and activities to one including the attitudes and emotions of diverse cultural groups. This kind of provocative awareness relies on strangeness and amplification to draw attention to issues of concern in the community. In this way, the Projected Realities system is intended not only to support ongoing relationships, but to act as a sociocultural intervention at personal, community, or political levels.

The Projected Reality proposal is for a system intended to exist over time in the Bijlmer, growing in value and meaning with use. While drawing on the arts, it is neither intended to be judged in a gallery context, nor as a personal statement about our perceptions of the Bijlmer. Instead, like any good collaborative technology, it is intended to form a new channel of expression and communication that people in the Bijlmer can appropriate for themselves. In suggesting that the Projected Reality system might raise awareness, communication and presence, we are also hopeful that it might be used for subversion, local obsessions, or play.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

The Presence project is supported by a European Union grant under the I3 initiative. Elena Pacenti of the Domus Academy collaborated closely on the Cultural Probes, and Ben Hooker, Shona Kitchen, and Brendon Walker made innumerable contributions as design assistants. We thank the members of the Bijlmer user group, and particularly Danielle van Diemen, the local coordinator, for their enthusiastic participation in the project. We are also grateful to our partners from the Domus Academy, Netherlands Design Institute, Telenor, Human Factors Solutions, Scuola Superiore de Santa Ana, and IDEA. Finally, we thank Anne Schlottmann, Fiona Raby, and Colin Burns for useful comments.

THE HISTORY TABLECLOTH: ILLUMINATING DOMESTIC ACTIVITY 

ABSTRACT 

The History Tablecloth is a flexible substrate screen-printed with electroluminescent material forming a grid of lace-like elements. When objects are left on the table, cells beneath them light to form a halo that grows over a period of hours, highlighting the flow of objects in the home. The Tablecloth explores an approach to design that emphasises engaging, open-ended situations over defined utilitarian purposes. Long-term deployment of the History Tablecloth in a volunteer household revealed complex ways that people experienced and interacted with the Tablecloth. Beyond evoking reflection on the flow of objects over a particular table, the Tablecloth served as a ground for interpretative reflection about technology, an asset for social interaction, and an aesthetic object. Even behaviours we saw as system errors were interpreted by the users as interactively rich. Their experience highlights the subtlety of domestic ubiquitous computing, illustrating alternatives to traditional views of technology’s domestic role. 

Author Keywords Domestic technology, information appliance, ubiquitous computing, interaction design, interpretation, aesthetics 

INTRODUCTION 

The increasing proliferation of affordable microprocessors, sensors, actuators, displays and wireless networking over the last several years has given rise to a strong push for new forms of digital technology to enter the home. Visions for how this might evolve differ both in the technical infrastructures that are foreseen and the basic values and particular applications that are imagined [12, 13, 14]. 

What most domestic systems share, whether they are integrated centres for entertainment or distributed systems for tracking older people, is an implicit or explicit narrative about what they are for. Through their interfaces and form design, their packaging and documentation, and the scenarios of use conveyed through marketing, technological systems are designed to communicate how they are to be used, the values they serve, and the likely outcomes of using them. By implication, they imply a user model that extends from our capacities as system operators to the sort of people we are if we use these systems: what our values are, the activities we privilege, our aesthetics and cultural identities (c.f. [5, 2]). They commodify our identities, creating representations of certain ways of approaching and experiencing the world that we can adopt to help construct ourselves. At a larger level, then, the domestic technologies developed in the research world and sold in the marketplace have cultural repercussions. They both reflect and shape the experience of home through the perceptions they reify and the actions they afford. 

The way that current and emerging technologies represent and constitute the home may be critiqued on several grounds. To begin with, we may believe simply that they misrepresent the experience of home, unfairly emphasizing some forms of engagement while dismissing others. For instance, commercial forces encourage new technological products and research to address mainstream activities and values at the expense of more idiosyncratic ones, potentially leading to increasing cultural uniformity. In response to this, some researchers have advocated designing for idiosyncratic or extreme users [4] [5], if only to ensure a flow of new ideas to the mainstream. 

A different objection to current representations of the home is that they tend to emphasise utilitarian versions of work, entertainment, and consumer activity. From this point of view, less purposeful, more exploratory and playful engagements in the home are poorly served by current technologies. In response to this, we might focus on designing for homo ludens, people as playful creatures [10]. Ludic design is not just a matter of entertainment or whimsy, but focuses on providing resources that encourage people to explore, speculate and wander, finding new perspectives on potentially serious issues [8].

The argument for supporting more playful, ludic forms of engagement itself becomes a new critique of the tendency for technologies to act as embodied representations of the home, however. For inherent to the notion of ludic engagement—of playful explorations, new perceptions and reflections—is that this is not an experience to be passively consumed, but an intrinsically motivated and personally defined form of engagement. This requires that ludic technologies offer a great degree of scope for personal engagement. From this perspective, then, it is the very tendency for technologies to embody a representation about privileged activities and values that is problematic.

Designing for Interpretative Appropriation 

It appears impossible in principle, and undesirable in practice, to develop technologies without any embodied representation of users, settings and usage. Choosing a set of technical capabilities inherently implies rejecting others, and thus a judgment about desirable opportunities for action. Similarly, there is no such thing as a neutral aesthetics. Choosing to avoid particular aesthetic styles (e.g. modernist, punk, childlike) is not the same as avoiding an aesthetic commitment altogether. Even if perfectly unbiased systems were possible, they would offer nothing for people to react against or be inspired by. Making statements about people and activities is an integral feature of design. 

Nonetheless, several tactics have emerged over the last several years for designing technologies that avoid overly constrained representations of users, settings or usage [see 16]. Two basic strategies can be distinguished by the way they handle the semantic mapping between a system and its environment. On the one hand are systems that leave this mapping unspecified or open-ended; on the other are those that specify a semantic mapping, but create ambiguity around its extent or implications. 

Semantically unspecified systems use technology to create interactive situations without specifying their meaning in terms external to the system itself. For example, Tobie Kerridge and Andy Law’s Media Mediators [11] are a collection of objects that exhibit remote controlled movements such as rolling, unfurling, and opening without a priori mapping to external events. Their intention is to explore the connotations of these movements by asking volunteers to determine the mappings for themselves, thus leaving open the possibility that these interactions could mean radically different things to different people. Similarly, the Key Table [16] uses the force with which things are placed on a table to control the tilt of an associated picture frame. Although this was conceived as a form of emotional expression, this mapping was (inadvertently) not communicated to volunteers, who were thus in the position to develop their own interpretation of the situation. 

Semantically ambiguous systems use technology to respond or refer to external situations or events, but employ various tactics to undermine a simple interpretation. One approach is to develop systems that embody representations of external situations, but then subvert the authority of these representations. For instance, Böhlen and Mateas’s Office Plant #1 [1] is a robotic “plant” that uses AI techniques to assess and respond to the emotional and social tenor of its owners’ incoming email stream. Though its configurations and movements represent incoming email, they are purposefully crafted to be somewhat opaque, creating an “alien presence” requiring effort to interpret. 

Another tactic for creating ambiguity is to create systems that clearly relate to external situations without indicating a judgment about their meaning. This creates an ambiguity of relationship [6] in which designers can suggest a topic for consideration, while allowing considerable scope for peoples’ interpretation and evaluation of the meaning it might have for them personally. This is the tactic we used in designing the History Tablecloth. 

The strategies for designing systems that refrain from imposing strong representations on users have different strengths and weaknesses. Semantically unspecified systems promise the most latitude to users in determining their own meanings, but risk failing to afford any meaningful semantic relationship outside of the system itself. Semantically ambiguous systems allow designers to raise issues without determining their interpretation, but need to be sensitive in how they indicate openness for (re)interpretation lest they appear too prescriptive on the one hand, or simply nonsensical on the other. 

Nonetheless, both strategies appear promising in allowing users the possibility of interpretative appropriation of interactive systems. Rather than embodying clear and constrained representations of people, activities and contexts that threaten to commodify our experience, they remain more or less open to people determining their own meanings. In this paper, we describe a system we developed that uses semantic ambiguity to permit interpretative appropriation in the home, and report on a long-term user study indicating the range of meanings people found. 

THE HISTORY TABLECLOTH 

The History Tablecloth is a flexible plastic substrate screenprinted with electroluminescent material printed to form a grid of lace-like elements (Figure 1). We applied research by the Lancaster Equator team [15] to develop a system in which load sensors placed under the table’s legs are used to track the position of multiple objects on the tabletop. When objects are left on the table, cells beneath them are lit to form a halo that grows slowly over a period of hours. When objects are removed, the corresponding halo is designed to disappear over a period of about 30 seconds. 

Making History Visible 

The History Tablecloth was designed to create a situation in which the history of objects in the home could become perceptually salient. There were several sources of inspiration for the design. 

First, our Equator colleagues reported an ethnographic study of how information moves around domestic spaces [3]. The study focused largely on tangible information (i.e. printed materials such as post) but also electronic information such as email (which often becomes tangible through printing). Through their observations of several households, they identified key sites that, though manifesting differently in different homes, appeared across those they studied. These included locations where information was held on initially entering the home, places where information was “processed” (e.g. mail is filtered, bills are paid, etc.), and places where information is displayed. These key locations corresponded to surfaces in the home such as tables, shelves and notice boards. 

This study highlighted the importance of information flow over surfaces in the home as a phenomenon relevant for design. It also resonated with our own informal observations about the history of objects within the home. For instance, Figure 2 shows a sketch diagram of objects within the dining area of one of the authors’ in-laws. As the key indicates, of particular interest here were the extremely varied time-scales of objects on the shelves surrounding the dining table. While some of the objects on the shelf, such as post and newspaper, might be moved on an hourly basis, other objects, such as decorative vases and similar artefacts, appear not to have been moved significantly for about 20 years. This tendency seemed ripe for design intervention. 

In fact, earlier design explorations in other projects had already dealt with similar issues. For instance, one of the twenty or so proposals developed for the Alternatives project sponsored by Hewlett Packard [9] was called Benevolent Poltergeists (Figure 3). This was based on the observation that artifacts displayed around the home, often including our most emotionally charged memorabilia, tend to lose their ability to attract attention over time, becoming essentially invisible to long-term inhabitants. The Benevolent Poltergeist would be a robot that would emerge late at night, moving items around on their shelves to new configurations. For instance, objects might be moved to teeter on the edge of a shelf, stacked upon one another to create a precarious totem, or simply ordered according to size. Through such tactics, the device would disrupt people’s habitual sense of order in the home, rekindling their interest and sense of possession. 

Like the Benevolent Poltergeists, the History Tablecloth also addresses issues concerning the movement (or lack thereof) of objects in the home. Rather than implying that objects shouldn’t be neglected, as the Benevolent Poltergeists do, the History Tablecloth simply makes visible a state of affairs. The interpretation of that situation is left to the people who encounter the Tablecloth. Some might feel that it is a prompt to tidy up more often, others might become reluctant to move objects on the table lest they disrupt a particularly pretty pattern of lights. Unlike the Benevolent Poltergeists, which use a strategy similar to Matteus’ alien presence [1] in service of a particular understanding (that objects left on shelves tend to be neglected), the History Tablecloth was designed to raise the issue of object movement without imposing a particular point of view. It is intended to establish an ambiguity of relationship for people to resolve themselves. 

Developing the History Tablecloth The original proposal for the History Tablecloth was for a table, not a tablecloth. The proposal showed a grid of lights embedded in a tabletop, lighting under objects left on the table. The sequence of sketches (often shown as an animation) made clear that the patch of lights should grow slowly the longer objects were left on the surface, and fade quickly after they had been removed. 

The original proposal did not specify the technologies to be used in constructing the History Tablecloth, but the grid of red lights clearly implied using high-intensity LED’s, and this is the approach we took in initial feasibility tests of the technology (see Figure 5). We constructed a number of grids of LED’s both to assess the aesthetic appearance we could achieve and to understand the technical issues of creating a very large grid of lights. 

Although the visual appearance of the LEDs was appealing, using them had several drawbacks. First, it appeared that a large grid of LED’s would draw too much power to be feasible. One estimate was that a full-scale table would use around 30 amps (roughly equivalent to an electric cooker), though we might have been able to reduce this. In addition, though we experimented with a number of means to power the lamps, ending with a Maxim LED display driver chip, a clever arrangement would have been necessary to control a full complement. It also became clear that wiring the table would be a large and tedious job, and that the table itself would be relatively inflexible once built. 

As an alternative to using LEDs, we experimented with electroluminescent material of the sort used for, e.g., backlighting laptop screens. This material had the advantage of being relatively inexpensive and requiring little power. Moreover, we soon discovered that we could cut the material into more-or-less arbitrary shapes, allowing us to create more interesting patterns for the tabletop than that suggested by the initial proposal. Our initial experiments involved cutting up 50x50 mm pre-made sheets and driving them with off-the-shelf inverters (see Figure 6). 

Soon after we began experimenting with electroluminescent material, we saw work by Rachel Wingfield, a graduating textile designer at the Royal College of Art (see http://loop.pH). Her final-year piece was a prototype curtain with electroluminescent material screen-printed upon it in a floral pattern that could be lit in three independent stages. This introduced us to the possibility of using screenprinting to create the large-scale grid needed for the History Tablecloth. Not only would screen-printing allow us to lay out the material much more easily than by hand, but it would allow us to create a much more intricate pattern for the piece. Thus we hired Rachel Wingfield to help us specify the pattern for the History Tablecloth’s cells, and to liase with Elumin8, the Southampton company that specialized in electroluminescent screen-printing. 

Our initial hope had been to arrange the electronics of the Tablecloth as a matrix, so that any given cell could be powered by running current along appropriate rows and columns of a wiring matrix. Unfortunately, this proved infeasible due to cross-talk among the cells, so that using this strategy lit up rows and columns rather than just the target cell. In the end, we had to specify separate printed electrical connections to each of the 95 independently controllable lights on the Tablecloth. 

The final design for the History Tablecloth, then, involved screen-printing 5 layers of conductive ink, insulating materials, and electroluminescent material onto a flexible plastic substrate. The electrical connections ended in a wide ribbon cable running from one of the ends of the Tablecloth (see Figure 7). 

It has to be said that we were initially disappointed by the aesthetic appearance of the prototype Tablecloths. Most notably, the borders between the hexagonal cells were darker than the cells themselves, giving the appearance of an imitation tile pattern (see Figure 7). Fortunately we were able to solve this problem by covering the Tablecloth with a sheet of semi-opaque paper that masked the offensive pattern while allowing the lights to shine through. 

Using Load Sensing to Track Objects 

Perhaps the most significant advantage of deciding to use printed electroluminescent material instead of LEDs is that it allowed us to develop the design as a tablecloth to be used with peoples’ existing tables rather than as a complete table. This meant that instead of imposing a new piece of furniture into peoples’ homes, we could simply modify their existing furniture. This flexibility promised to make field trials much less intrusive, and in the long run to open new usage possibilities. 

Developing the design as a tablecloth was also made possible by our strategy for tracking objects on the table surface. As it turns out, the History Tablecloth was one of a number of designs we developed to use a weight-table system that had been developed by our colleagues at the University of Lancaster ([15]; for another example of a design using this system see [7]). This uses the different output of industrial load-cells placed on table corners to track the location of weights upon the surface. By storing the history of weights appearing on and leaving the surface, the system is able, in principle, to do a good job of tracking multiple objects at the same time. This ability was one of the direct inspirations behind the History Tablecloth. 

Using the Weight Table system meant that we could modify any table to track objects upon it simply by mounting load sensors under the table legs. We achieved this by embedding the load-sensors in custom-designed plastic cups that held the sensors and table leg securely together. 

Computational system 

The output from the load sensors was wired to a Smart-It microprocessor board also developed by our Lancaster colleagues [15]. This bridged between the weight sensors and a dedicated PC which ran the location-tracking algorithm, used this to track the history of objects on the table, and send appropriate commands to the inverter used to control the lighting of the History Tablecloth. 

The computational hardware was contained in a purposebuilt housing to be placed under one end of whatever table was used with the History Tablecloth (see Figure 7). The housing was somewhat larger than we would have liked, and the use of smaller computers (e.g. the so-called ‘gumstick PC’) would allow the design of a much smaller unit to be, for instance, hung underneath the edge of a table. Nonetheless, our design at least partially de-emphasised the fact that the system used a standard PC. 

We developed a graphical interface to track the operation of the sensors, including the raw output of the sensors, the system’s hypotheses about weight locations, and the corresponding patterns to be lit on the Tablecloth. This interface was invaluable for debugging but was not presented to the people who encountered the final design. 

The system was equipped with only two control points for users. The first, a large red “panic button” mounted on the front of the computer housing, allowed people to reset the system if its internal representation started to diverge from the reality of weights on the table, e.g. because of erroneous readings or missed placements or removals of weight. The second was a simple power switch mounted on the back of the housing, arranged to allow people to reboot the computer and automatically restart the Tablecloth software in case of more serious problems. 

The Best Laid Plans: Problems with the Prototype 

The basic History Tablecloth system we implemented was reasonably straightforward. To summarise, load cells under the table legs provided continuous data about weights on the table’s surface. This data was used by the system to try to determine the location of potentially multiple weights, and the history of each detected object was tracked over time. When the system recognized that a new weight had been added, the closest cell on the tablecloth was lit, and if the system recognized that a weight remained, additional rings were lit over a period of about 6 hours. When the system saw a weight removed, the corresponding “halo” was faded down over a period of about 30 seconds. 

With tuning, the prototype worked well in our studio. But even in this relatively controlled environment, the system tended to diverge from its intended behaviour over time. 

First, individual cells and groups of cells began to burn out as we tested the system. Sometimes this was because small folds in the Tablecloth caused a break in the thin electroluminescent film. Other times, the insulating layer seemed to develop small cracks, causing a brief but dramatic “lightening” effect across several cells as they short-circuited. The underlying problem was that the Tablecloth was “about 10 times more complicated” than anything the printing company had made before (as they later admitted) and the resulting prototypes were more fragile than we had expected. In fact, most of the ten Tablecloths we had fabricated ended up with burnt out cells before we started our field trial. Fortunately, we found that under-powering the Tablecloth, and mounting a piece of glass on top to protect it, substantially decreased burn-outs, and we observed few if any during our field trial. 

A more enduring problem involved inaccuracies in the object-tracking software. The algorithm was reliable when used carefully in our studio, but in casual use was liable to being misled. For instance, leaning on the table when placing a weight offset the registered position, causing the halo to appear in the wrong place. When the weight was removed, the algorithm might fail to associate it with the original placement, and the halo would remain behind. Sometimes the threshold signaling an end-of-placement event would not be crossed, leaving the system waiting while other events occurred. Other times, floor vibrations triggered spurious placement or lifting events. The end result was that, over time, the system’s representation (and the Tablecloth’s display) of objects would become increasingly inaccurate, and because this meant that lifting events wouldn’t be recognized, an increasing number of cells would remain continuously lit. 

We became aware of these problems while developing the History Tablecloth in the studio. Through careful redesign of the system, and tuning of the electronics, we managed to reduce them significantly, and hoped that a similar process of on-site tuning would help us minimize them in the field. Nonetheless, we recognized that some problems would remain—this was one of the motivations for including the reset and reboot switches on the prototype device. 

DEPLOYING THE HISTORY TABLECLOTH 

We deployed the History Tablecloth in a volunteer household for over four months and conducted an extensive program of empirical observation of it in situ. The intention of this study was not just to assess the Tablecloth per se, but to gain a deeper insight into what it means to design artefacts that allow for interpretative appropriation in domestic settings. Our research strategy favoured a detailed examination of a single home through an extended period rather than point studies over a much smaller timescale. By concentrating on a single deployment we were able to see how use and appreciation of the Tablecloth varied over time, how it related to the rhythms of domestic life, many of which extend far beyond the daily (e.g. seasonal feast days and their preparation), amongst many other issues. 

Although we focused on a single home, more than 20 people encountered the Tablecloth during its deployment. This enabled us to sample both a range of casual experiences of the Tablecloth and examine the householders’ encounters with it in particular depth. In common with much field research concerned with studying a setting in depth, ethnographic observation formed our core methodology. As such methods have become an established contribution in many areas where technologies are studied in real world settings, we do not give more details here but refer to [7] as another example of these methods in our own work. 

The household we studied consisted of a male/female couple living in an apartment in the east end of London. Their living space was part of the second floor of a converted factory that offered one large open space with a separate bathroom. The main space (some 100 square meters) contained recognizably separate relaxing, cooking, working, storage and sleeping areas. It occupied the width of the building and so had light from both sides. The couple typically both worked from home though were often called out to appointments during the working day. 

Situating the Tablecloth 

In consultation with the man (whom we shall call G) and woman (B), it was decided to best deploy the History Tablecloth and its table in their kitchen area (see figure 9). G and B told us that the observance of mealtimes was important to them and that B often worked at the existing kitchen table. It seemed to us that this spot would give the maximum chance for interesting object-traffic to occur in a way that the Tablecloth could react to. With the existing table removed, we sited the Tablecloth so that it could have access to power and oriented it so that the computer housing at one end would cause least obstruction. Some initial concern was raised by B and G as to whether the Tablecloth would be liable to heat damage given its position in a kitchen environment. Our lab testing had not considered such situations so we were content to find that out in the field. We did warn of the dangers of liquid spills near the edges of the table in case of seepage between the Tablecloth’s various layers and asked that B or G turn off the mains power to the table if such problems occurred. 

The apartment floor (the original wooden factory floor) was quite uneven and presented some challenges for setting the table level and calibrating the load sensing. Pads were placed under each table leg and the surface aligned with a spirit level. A series of tests were run and once the Tablecloth reliably recognized the placement of a saucepan and its removal, things were left to run. 

The Tablecloth was described to G and B as minimally as possible. They were told that it would respond to objects placed on the table by lighting up and that the research team was interested in what it is like having such an artefact in their home. No specific details were given about how the table and cloth work. The reset button was pointed out by comparison with similar controls on existing computing technology with which G and B were familiar, but no particular occasion for using it was highlighted. 

Domestic Objects and Their Detection 

As our experiences in the studio suggested, the History Tablecloth’s behaviour in G and B’s home was a complicated mixture of intended reactions to weight with various false alarms, offset errors, missed pick-ups, etc. The Tablecloth responded regularly to weights appearing on and leaving the table, but its response was far from perfect from the point of view of our original design intent. This could, of course, be assessed in formal terms from log data and more formal testing. What was of interest to us, however, was what G and B and their callers made of the detection abilities of the Tablecloth, what they noticed, how they became sensitized to features of objects placed upon the table and their traffic through it, and how all of this impacted upon their interpretative appropriation of the Tablecloth. To foreshadow, what surprised us about their response is that what we perceived as errors in the Tablecloth’s behaviour were perceived by them as interactive richness. 

It was clear to G and B immediately that the Tablecloth illuminated where a notable domestic object was placed. But within their first day of living with the table, it became apparent that some objects would consistently pass undetected (very light ones, e.g. a pencil). Some objects were detected in a surprising and engaging fashion. A lightweight wine glass was missed on its initial placement but became illuminated once wine was poured in. Placement of B’s laptop on the table would usually lead to some cells in the cloth’s design brightening but as the laptop had four ‘feet’ it could be any one of these that was illuminated or, occasionally, a light might come on underneath the laptop and not be visible (yet). There could be considerable uncertainty about what to expect of the response of the table to objects with an extended footprint and/or multiple pressure points. 

Pushing or leaning direct on the table might also lead to the detection of an object, as occasionally did walking heavily by the table on the old floorboards. Of course as the load sensors detect incident forces, it is not possible to discriminate between occasions where someone has just leant on the table and is maintaining their posture from those where an object has been placed and left. Placing a heavy hand on an object that is already there can also lead to anomalous detection (eg a new object is detected just adjacent to the existing one or the existing one is taken to have gone once the heavy hand is released). 

One should not get the impression from this that the Tablecloth’s patterns of illumination were effectively random. A typical scene would be one in which some objects were clearly encircled by light, some had been missed, and some light patches were close to but not exactly where the object had been placed (see Figure 10). Equally, as the patterns spread over time, more and more objects on the table will come to be illuminated from below whether they have been detected or not. This makes for an overall relationship between objects and light that is noticeably non-random. As such, and this is a point we will return to, G and B preferred the incomplete but noticeable coincidence of the light pattern with the layout of objects. This, to them, was more subtle and intriguing, as were the occasionally enigmatic behaviours of the table in response to objects being placed and removed. 

The nature of object detection on the Tablecloth also sensitized G and B to features of objects and their traffic that might not otherwise have been attended to, their footprint, their edges, their weight; more generally: their behavioural repertoire on the Tablecloth. Domestic objects were interpreted from time to time in a new light, not only as wine glasses, plates, pencils, laptops but as variable and intriguing in how they can be detected and illuminated. 

Interpreting the Light 

Another feature of the History Tablecloth’s real-world behaviour that we had not picked up in the studio was how its sensitivity seemed to vary over time as the population of objects increased. That is, a weighty object placed carefully on the table just after reset might well be reliably detected. However, that same object placed on the table when it was already full of detected objects might be missed. G: “Maybe it reaches a state where it’ll stay put. It’ll get stuck and you’ll have to press reset to get it to start being reactive again”. On another occasion when the table did not respond to a quite heavy bowl of tomatoes, G suggested: “with all this weight on the table, it probably cannot sense more”. G and B also noted that the table, once it got ‘stuck’, was often less sensitive to objects being removed. Occasionally (but not always), they could get the table to retain a ‘stuck’ pattern but with no objects on the table. Once, we observed B working at the table with a neat pattern of illumination around the laptop. “But this is the pattern I made with last Sunday’s lunch!” 

It is clear that G (most notably, but B too) was beginning to offer interpretations of how the Tablecloth worked, what its ‘states’ were, its operational trajectory, and how one might intervene in this or work with it. “Maybe it’s computing things, measuring for how long things are on, and gets less responsive when it builds up knowledge of what you have on the table. Then it has its view of what you have on the table so it stops. But when you reset, it knows nothing so it responds quickly.”

Our point is not to evaluate G’s interpretation as true or false, still less to compare it against how we would understand the table’s behaviour. Rather, it is important to note that such interpretative activity occurs and is occasioned by specific behaviours of the table that are in some ways intriguing and non-obvious. Indeed, the table’s behaviour became a talking point between G and B and their callers. G and B developed a local knowledge of the table’s behaviour (its occasionally anomalous detections, its changes in sensitivity over time) complete with ways of interpreting things that occurred, both expected and unexpected. Very commonly, this knowledge and interpretations of phenomena were compared with other views. G (to a visitor, J): “It’s interesting you’re trying to give sense to it and you do it in a different way from me. You said it was confused. I just think it is doing its thing”. 

Noticing phenomena worthy of interpretation in the table’s behaviour, offering and discussing interpretations, looking out for things in the future, and so forth are valuable activities for G and B in their appreciation of the Tablecloth and not obstructions to its use and enjoyment. Indeed, the Tablecloth seemed to offer a quite open ended set of things to observe even with four months of co-habitation. A number of phenomena occurred with requisite rarity to keep G and B’s interest piqued. Occasionally, they would observe lights pulsing on and off. Once, all the cells lit up at one end around objects placed there and, when those objects were removed, a pattern of light cascaded to the other end of the table rather than gently fading at the spot. This unique occurrence “kept us talking for days”. 

Enhancing Everyday Activities 

In the case of the History Tablecloth, such moments of interpretation and wonder are not problematic for folding the artefact into customary domestic activities. Whether it lights up or not, there’s still a table there with all its usual capabilities. The failure of a cell to brighten or fade does not lead to any crisis of affordance such as pots and pans crashing to the floor. Finding the Tablecloth’s behaviour intriguing and worthy of interpretation is quite a natural affair to accommodate into the ordinary domestic activities the table is used for: working, preparing food, eating. 

Indeed, more than that, G and B found some of these activities to be engagingly ‘illuminated’ (all senses intended) by the History Tablecloth. For example, a common routine for them just before guests arrived for dinner involved “resetting the table”, not just ‘setting’ it (G’s joke). Then, as places are marked and serving dishes placed, a pattern unfolds before the guests’ eyes. At these moments the nature of that pattern, its partial coincidence with the objects placed, how it grows, strange happenings at other meals, and so forth can be discussed. Then, when the dishes are removed the pattern remains. It may fade or if it is ‘stuck’ it may stay for days depending on whether B or G press reset. Either way, there is a momento of the meal. 

Some everyday routines (here dining) were enhanced by the Tablecloth. Other routines were not disrupted (eg using the table for work activities). Some other activities came into existence where the playful opportunities of the table were more to the fore, for example, predicting whether a particular object would or would not be detected. In all this, that the Tablecloth’s behaviour is commonly a matter for interpretation does not disrupt its use. On the contrary, it provides engaging opportunities for new activities or enrichments of existing routines. 

Appreciating the Tablecloth Aesthetically 

Sited as it was next to a large (old) factory window on the (now) kitchen side of B and G’s living space, the cells of the cloth did not appear very clearly during daylight hours. But as it grew dark, the glow from the History Tablecloth became noticeable. G: “It’s like an electric doily. At night it really comes into its own”. A number of B and G’s friends, who were skeptical when they first heard of ‘an electronic tablecloth’ became fascinated when the table was seen first hand and in the good viewing conditions of an autumn evening. B: “It was quite spectacular when A was sitting here and the light came out from her. She said “it likes me’. It looks great when it’s dark”. Particular patterns might be found appealing even if the table is unresponsive. G: “I like this pattern, it was yesterday’s dinner”. Clearly then the Tablecloth has a visual aesthetic that was found appealing. 

We would like to argue, however, that the Tablecloth has an interactional and interpretative aspect to its aesthetics too. That G can preserve a ‘stuck’ pattern until the next reset is a feature of the (intended and unintended) interactional behaviour and capability of the Tablecloth. In many respects, there is not so very much you can do with the Tablecloth: move objects around, press reset. But, as we have observed in previous work [7], this minimal interactive repertoire can come to be strongly appreciated. As one does not have to continually attend to the artefact and make selections from a rich set of actions to engage with it, there is little to learn and little to disrupt ongoing domestic routines. Initially, B and G expected a richer visual display, “something photographic, or text perhaps, or for activity to be recorded and replayed”. However, the minimalism of cells brightening and fading, and the simple means by which one interacts with the Tablecloth, came to be preferred. G: “As I don’t have control over this, I can just enjoy it”. Perhaps also helped by this minimalism, the table can become an occasion for interpretation, talk and speculation. This seemed also to be important to B and G’s appreciation of the table. B: “I like how it sometimes does strange things”. In this way, the sometimes anomalous behaviour of the Tablecloth and its minimal interactivity added to the aesthetic appeal of the piece. 

CONCEPTUAL APPROPRIATION IN THE WILD 

G and B appreciated the History Tablecloth as an enhancement to their home. As B concluded: “The table’s trying to fit in with people and their lives rather than people having to fit in with the table—that requires someone to understand how you live your life.” We had not designed the Tablecloth for B and G, however. Instead, we designed it to be appropriated by them (or anybody) through the ways they understood it explicitly and through their actions. Because this appropriation was personal, the Tablecloth seemed particularly well designed for their circumstances. 

The Tablecloth became, for G and B, the focus for complex, multi-layered interpretation. They valued it in ways and along dimensions that we had not anticipated: as an aesthetic artefact, a responsive one, as an adjunct to everyday activities, and as a resource for social interaction. It had appeal both in itself and in the way it interacted with everyday things and activities. While we had explicitly sought to support some of these modes of appreciation, others emerged that we had not anticipated. 

Most notably, the systematic ways in which the Tablecloth’s behaviour diverged from the interaction we had intended created a different situation for the volunteers than we had expected. What was interesting about this was the strong tendency of G and B to see system behaviours we perceived as erroneous as interactively rich. While we worried about the fragility of the load-sensing algorithm, they seemed rarely to consider that the system might be broken, and instead entertained various speculations about the complex reactions the Tablecloth had to objects placed upon it. In part, this was because we had never defined for them the conditions in which the Tablecloth should be considered as working or broken. Instead, they were free to consider all reactions of the table as legitimate interactions with the weights upon it. 

Several conditions seemed important to the experience that our volunteers had with the Tablecloth. First, it clearly reacted to weights placed upon or taken off of it. But the occasionally anomalous behaviour it exhibited lent greater richness to the experience, without becoming so random that subtle, emergent patterns could not be perceived. Indeed, it appeared that the complexity of the ‘erroneous’ behaviour afforded a more interesting interactive experience than might have been created had the Tablecloth been working ‘properly’. This was possible because the Tablecloth’s behaviour could be accommodated in its setting—it was not disruptive nor destructive—and could engender new activities as well. Indeed, the actual behaviour of the History Tablecloth led to a range of phenomena, from those that were common and predictable, to those that were relatively uncommon but intriguing, to those that were extremely rare and valuable as such. 

In sum, the History Tablecloth exhibited a range of semireproducible, intriguing behaviours that G and B could make sense of as illuminating their everyday lives. Many of the phenomena we observed were unanticipated and, it must be admitted, the load sensing algorithm did not work as intended. Ironically, this constitutes a better demonstration of the viability of design for interpretative appropriation than we anticipated. 

G: “I like it that it takes time to fade. If it faded instantly, it’d look far too abrupt, not gentle or abstract enough. I like it that sometimes it gets stuck and then you can see how things were. I’d be very self-conscious at the table if it always followed me and reacted to me. It adds interest to what you are doing, which would not happen if things moved randomly. It’s reacting but it’s doing so in a way that gives it a life of its own. That makes it like an artwork. For a tablecloth that’s pretty good going.” 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

This research was supported by the Equator IRC (EPSRC GR/N15986/01). We thank our colleagues on that project for their support and insights. 

